Title: Small Body Dynamics with SBDynT: Proper Elements and Chaos Analysis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27099v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 00:29:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 47

Markdown Content:
> Draft version March 31, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7.0.1

Small Body Dynamics with SBDynT: Proper Elements and Chaos Analysis 

Dallin Spencer, 1 Kat Volk, 2 Darin Ragozzine, 1 and Renu Malhotra 3

> 1Brigham Young University, Department of Physics and Astronomy, N283 ESC, Provo, UT 84602, USA
> 2Planetary Science Institute, 1700 E Fort Lowell Rd STE 106, Tucson, AZ 85719, USA
> 3University of Arizona, Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, 1629 E University Blvd, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA

ABSTRACT The Small Body Dynamics Tool (SBDynT) is software written for the community of Solar Sys-tem small body researchers to perform dynamical classification, characterization, and investigation. SBDynT provides advanced simulation analysis capabilities that make it straightforward to determine mean motion resonance occupation, proper orbital elements, and a variety of stability indicators. These calculations can be performed for small bodies that are known, newly discovered, or simulated; observa-tional uncertainties can be incorporated through the use of dynamical clones. In this paper, we describe the methods for producing proper orbital elements and stability indicators, which serve as essential tools for characterizing dynamical stability and long-term evolution. Through extensive validation, we demonstrate that this code offers a robust open-source framework for investigating the dynamics of Solar System small bodies with high accuracy. We also aim for computational efficiency allowing SBDynT to provide dynamical information for the several-fold increases in small bodies expected in the LSST era. 

Keywords: Solar System, Asteroids, Kuiper Belt Objects, Proper Elements, Orbital Dynamics 

1. INTRODUCTION In the study of solar system small bodies (SSSBs), sev-eral methods can be used to explore their orbital dynam-ics. Modern methods include high-accuracy and fast “n-body integration” which use well-understood gravita-tional interactions to propagate orbits over billions of years. Several integrators are used for the study of solar system dynamics and evolution, such as mercury (J. E. Chambers 1999), SWIFT (H. F. Levison & M. J. Dun-can 1994), and rebound (H. Rein & S. F. Liu 2012). However, a simulation of an object’s orbit typically re-quires additional interpretation from a detailed dynam-ical analysis to extract meaningful scientific insights about its behavior and evolution. Although open source simulators have been available for some time, generally accessible codes capable of performing a wide range of dynamical analyses for SSSBs have largely been lacking. With the upcoming Vera C. Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) expected to discover over 37,000 new trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs) and approximately 5 million asteroids (S. Eggl et al. 2019; J. A. Kurlander et al. 2025), the SSSB community faces an unprecedented influx of new data. Precise homoge-neous astrometry over the 10-year survey will lead to significantly improved orbit quality in addition to quan-tity. This prompts the development of standardized, ro-bust software capable of performing efficient and reliable dynamical analyses, eliminating the need for individual researchers to write custom code for each study (H. H. Hsieh et al. 2019). We aim to provide the Small Body Dynamics Tool (SBDynT) (D. Spencer et al. 2024; K. Volk et al. 2024), an efficient, user-friendly, open-source software tool for the analysis and study of SSSB dynam-ical histories using rebound 1.An early version of SBDynT was discussed and pre-sented in K. Volk & R. Malhotra (2025). After previous Alpha and Beta builds were recently completed, this pa-per introduces the major release of SBDynT version 1.0, as available on the GitHub repository, containing all of the following features:  

> 1https://github.com/small-body-dynamics/SBDynT
> arXiv:2603.27099v1 [astro-ph.EP] 28 Mar 2026

2

• Easily initialized, high quality Solar System simu-lations producing past and future trajectories for known SSSBs, including clones sampling orbit un-certainties 

• Resonance occupation and identification with ma-chine learning (K. Volk & R. Malhotra 2025; K. Volk et al. 2025) 

• Proper orbital elements 

• Stability/Chaos indicators. In this paper, we will discuss the methods and results for computing proper orbital elements (Section 2) and stability indicators (Section 3) over varying timescales for small body orbits using SBDynT. The process of identifying resonance occupation with SBDynT is dis-cussed separately (K. Volk & R. Malhotra 2025). We will compare our generated proper elements to published catalogs, and discuss any outlying regions of proper el-ement space with differences between the catalogs and SBDynT (Section 4). We will also demonstrate the ver-satility of the stability indicators provided by SBDynT by building and comparing generated stability maps in Classical TNO space (Section 4.3). 

2. PROPER ORBITAL ELEMENTS SSSB trajectories are almost always well-described as slightly perturbed heliocentric orbits. 2

Osculating heliocentric orbital elements describe the instantaneous Keplerian orbit that a theoretical body would follow if (suddenly) only the influence of the Sun’s gravity dictated the orbit of that object. While orbits may be described using various orbital elements and an-gles, the osculating elements we consider here are the semi-major axis ( a), eccentricity ( e), inclination ( I), ar-gument of periapse ( ω), longitude of the ascending node   

> 2SBDynT focuses on long-term (thousands to billions of years) gravitational trajectories of SSSBs approximated as massless points orbiting the Sun. SBDynT is not directly designed for studying natural or artificial satellites, moons, or SSSB bina-ries. Very close encounters or collisions between objects (e.g., when SSSBs masses may perturb orbits G. M. Bernstein et al. (2025) and O. Fuentes-Muñoz et al. (2025)) could lead to long-term inaccuracies. It is not natively designed to study the motion of dust or other objects which have non-negligible non-gravitational forces important for the motion (such as precise orbits of outgassing comets). When precise (ephemeris quality) or short-term orbits (e.g., for interstellar objects) are required, other resources are more appropriate such as ASSIST (M. J. Holman et al. 2023). While SBDynT does not currently han-dle these more specific science cases with high accuracy and fidelity, it could easily be used as a first analysis to identify objects in need of more customized modeling.

(Ω), and the mean anomaly ( M ). Together, they repre-sent a snapshot of the orbit’s shape and orientation at a specific epoch; together with the mass of the Sun, they represent a useful coordinate transformation from the SSSBs heliocentric position and velocity since all but M

are conserved in the unperturbed Keplerian case. Over time, an object’s osculating orbit evolves primarily due to additional forces such as gravitational interactions with other bodies in the Solar system with the strongest effect usually on the orientation angles ω and Ω, slower effects on e and I, and often minimal effects on a. Even the relatively rapid changes in orientation angles take thousands of orbital periods and are thus called “secu-lar” in the sense of long period cycles of time. Tracking an object’s orbit into the deep past or future allows for a variety of unique scientific insights. For ex-ample, statistically significant clusters of objects can in-dicate a past non-gravitational interaction. A common example is ejecta from an asteroid collision; at the time of the collision large numbers of present-day SSSBs had very similar orbital elements due to have nearly identical positions and very similar velocities. Backwards integra-tion of these asteroids shows a tight clustering in a, e, I,

ω, and Ω; conversely, identifying SSSBs where such ele-ments cluster at a specific point in the past can be used to identify and characterize such clusters known as col-lisional families (e.g., K. Hirayama (1918), D. Nesvorný et al. (2006), R. A. Marcus et al. (2011), D. Nesvorný et al. (2024)). Such families can be potentially primor-dial S. Ferrone et al. (2023), older V. Carruba et al. (2016), young Z. Knezevic et al. (2006), or “very young” D. Nesvorný et al. (2026) and can include thousands of objects or even just two in a “pair.” Advances in computational abilities and tools (includ-ing SBDynT) enable direct searches in backwards inte-grations for clusters, families, pairs, or other unusual orbital dynamics. While this may become more com-mon in the future, at present the state-of-the-art is to use a dynamically meaningful proxy: clusters in proper orbital elements. As discussed in more detail below, proper orbital elements approximately remove the forc-ing effects of the planets and are theoretically constant; in the real solar system, they are often nearly conserved away from mean-motion resonances (e.g., commensura-bilities between the orbital period of an SSSB and the orbital period of a planet). The first asteroid families were discovered as clusters in, effectively, analytical proper orbital elements (K. Hi-rayama 1918). It can be shown the the small differences in orbital elements at the time of family formation are amplified by planetary perturbations which cause the osculating elements to significantly diverge on secular 3timescales. Thus, removing the forced terms results in families that remain clustered in proper elements for much longer timescales. Determining proper elements and using them to iden-tify small body families is a continuously active area of research in the SSSB community (e.g., D. Nesvorný et al. 2024). While it may be possible to identify families more accurately through direct inspection of the n-body integrations (e.g., R. A. Marcus et al. 2011), identifying clusters in proper elements is likely more straightforward computationally and is the current state-of-the-art. The goal for the accuracy and precision of proper element identification is driven primarily by the desire to identify and characterize asteroid families. Furthermore, proper elements are, themselves, somewhat of an approxima-tion to the actual historical orbits of SSSBs. Thus, dif-ferent algorithmic choices are possible in the calculation of proper elements and a SBDynT’s implementation of proper element calculations can be considered successful if the precision is comparable to state-of-the-art cata-logs and if these catalogs (which use somewhat different methods) are generally consistent within these uncer-tainties. We explicitly explore these criteria in Section 4. In any case, the accurate identification of clusters and families provides significant insight into formation and evolution of SSSBs, particularly through collisions. V. Zappala et al. (1990) Families also provide insights into surface processing, non-gravitational dynamical evolu-tion (e.g., from Yarkovsky and YORP effects), and the number density of SSSBs as a function of time. W. F. Bottke et al. (2006); D. Vokrouhlický et al. (2006); B. T. Bolin et al. (2017) Proper elements can also be used to understand secular resonances which sculpt dynamical pathways throughout the solar system. D. P. O’Brien et al. (2007) Overall, the ability to mathematically sup-press the already known perturbations by planetary forcing helps uncover more interesting phenomena. We present an update to the SBDynT code aimed to make proper element calculations open source, easy to use, and computationally efficient. We begin by review-ing the theory of proper elements in Section 2.1. We then explain how we use REBOUND to compute SSSB orbits sufficient for accurate proper element calculation (Section 2.2). The calculation of “synthetic” proper el-ements using Fourier methods is discussed in detail in Section 2.3. Proper orbital elements are often assigned an “uncertainty” based on how well they are conserved quantities in time which we also follow (Section 2.4). Fi-nally, we note a mostly theoretical distinction between proper elements and “mean elements” that is relevant for many SSSBs in Section 2.5. 2.1. Proper Element Theory 

The time evolution of orbital elements can be approx-imated as a system of coupled normal modes in which proper elements are something like the initial conditions. A useful starting point is to transform to different set of variables. While the orbital elements ( a, e, I, ω, Ω,

M ) are useful and intuitive, singularities are sometimes introduced when modeling perturbations on orbital evo-lution. For example, the inclination of an object evolv-ing to 0◦ can cause Ω to instantaneously change by 180 ◦

to keep the inclination positive. For this reason, an ad-ditional set of orbital elements, sometimes referred to as the “equinoctial elements”, are often considered in perturbation theory. We use the modified equinoctial elements (J. L. Arsenault et al. 1970), defined by: 

h(t) = e(t) ∗ sin  ϖ(t)

k(t) = e(t) ∗ cos  ϖ(t) (1) and 

p(t) = sin  I(t) ∗ sin  Ω( t)

q(t) = sin  I(t) ∗ cos  Ω( t) (2) where ϖ is the longitude of periapse given by ϖ = ω+Ω .The h and k in Equation 1 are two-component vectors generated from e and ϖ that describe the orientation of the orbital ellipse, while p and q in Equation 2, gener-ated from I and Ω, similarly describe the orientation of the orbit plane. These two-component vectors jointly represent the orientation of the orbital ellipse and the orbital plane. In addition, singularities that occur with the original orbital elements at e = 0 , or i = 0 ◦, 90 ◦

are avoided with the equinoctial elements, preserving stability in computations of the orbital evolution over time. As two-component vectors, these equinoctial ele-ments can jointly represent the full time evolution of the orbital shape by joining them into complex vectors: 

> ⇀

e = k + ih

> ⇀

I = q + ip (3) which can be represented in simplified exponential form as: 

> ⇀

e = e(t) × ei ϖ(t)

> ⇀

I = sin  I(t) × ei Ω( t) (4) where e and i are Euler’s constant and the imaginary number, respectively. We will refer to ⇀

e and ⇀

I through-out the text as the eccentricity and inclination vectors; these vectors capture variations in the orbit, such as nodal or apsidal precession and changes in eccentricity and inclination. 4In orbital dynamics theory, deviations from Keplerian motion are often described using the “disturbing func-tion,” similar to the perturbation of a Hamiltonian. The disturbing function is found by first producing the famil-iar 2-body central force equation of gravity for the body whose motion is being studied, and then adding addi-tional forces to the system. The disturbing potential can then be expanded out (e.g., using Legendre polynomi-als) to high-order in small parameters relevant to a spe-cific system (e.g., C. D. Murray & S. F. Dermott 1999). For solar system bodies not in mean motion resonances, the main non-trivial perturbations can be determined by expanding the disturbing function to second-order in e and I and first-order in the planet/Sun mass ra-tio and ignoring the fast changing terms involving the mean anomaly, which tend to average out. The result is an analytical expression for long-term “secular” changes to the orbital elements and is known as (second-order) Laplace-Lagrange secular theory. In this theory, the time evolution of the orbital shape and plane of a small body can be represented by first-order differential equations that are coupled between the planets and the small body. The resulting solution for the evolution of ⇀

e and ⇀

I is a linear combination of eigen-modes that depend on the masses and orbital properties of the N included bodies: 

> ⇀

ej =

> N

X

> i=1

eji × ei(git+βi)

> ⇀

Ij =

> N

X

> i=1

Iji × ei(sit+γi)

(5) where N is the number of planets, the gi and si are secular planetary frequencies and where the βi, and γi

are phases (see C. D. Murray & S. F. Dermott (1999) for full details). What is significant about this formulation is that the secular evolution of the orbital plane and orientation are uncoupled from each other (At higher orders, these are no longer true, but the coupling effect is smaller.) Furthermore, there is no secular evolution of the semi-major axis at all. Using the nature of linear combinations, the individ-ual terms for each body in the system can be isolated, and it is possible to produce a singular term correspond-ing to the properties of just the small body’s orbit. The isolated term in the ⇀

e and ⇀

I evolution that depends on the small body’s orbital properties is called the “free” or proper term, and all additional terms which depend on the planets are the “forced” terms. While the forced terms contribute to the evolution of the osculating el-ements over time, and their amplitude depends on the object’s initial free parameters (e.g., distance to a per-turber), their temporal variation is governed solely by the evolution of the planetary perturber. In contrast, the free or proper term represents the body’s funda-mental orbital parameters as set after its most recent non-secular perturbation. The proper terms are fixed in time; the only temporal variation of the orbit in this approximation is the constant proper precession of the angles ϖ and Ω. As such, we can write the proper or-bital angles as ϖp(t) = gt + ϖp, 0 and Ωp(t) = st + Ω p, 0

where g and s are the proper precession rates, which are typically separate from the planetary secular rates 

gi and si; the amplitudes of ⇀

ep and ⇀

Ip remain fixed over time. In the Solar System, the secular timescales that affect a small body’s osculating ⇀

e and ⇀

I are primarily deter-mined by the gi and si planetary secular frequencies (Equation 5) and typically span from tens of thousands to millions of years. The shortest of these significant sec-ular periods is associated with Saturn’s dominant nodal precession frequency, s6, which has a period of ∼50,000 years. Some shorter-period variations may arise from linear combinations of secular frequencies, so dominant secular evolution generally is defined on timescales of 

tsec > 10 , 000 years. In the case of small-body orbital evolution, these secular frequencies have the the largest associated amplitudes in or near what we call secular resonances. Secular resonances differ from mean-motion reso-nances in 2 significant ways. First, while mean-motion resonances can have significant effects on the order of just a couple of orbital periods, the influence of secular resonances is felt on longer timescales. Second, mean-motion resonances are primarily defined by the relative orbital periods (and therefore semi-major axes) of the small body relative to a planet; even at the highest order, the shape of mean-motion resonances in orbital space are confined to a relatively small width around a specific semi-major axis. Secular resonances are func-tions of the precession rates of the small-body, g and 

s, which are themselves functions of the amplitude of the planetary forced terms. At first-order, these forced terms are primarily functions of semi-major axis, but at second-order, g and s become functions of eccentricity and inclination as well. As such, the shape of secular resonances in orbital space is much more complex. The combined effects of mean-motion and secular resonances are strongly seen in the dynamical architecture of the as-teroid belt and the TNOs, and are important features to consider when computing small body proper motion. Proper orbital elements can be calculated either ana-lytically (e.g. A. Milani & Z. Knežević 1998) using sec-ular perturbation theory (e.g. D. Brouwer & A. J. J. van 5Woerkom 1950; C. D. Murray & S. F. Dermott 1999), or they can be calculated with the use of a numeri-cal n-body orbit propagation (Z. Knežević & A. Milani 2000). In this second approach, “synthetic” proper ele-ments are calculated from numerical simulations of an object’s orbit by numerically identifying the planetary forced terms from the simulation, and then removing those forced terms from the SSSB’s orbital evolution. While both methods are effective, synthetic proper el-ements have been found to be more reliable than their (even higher-order) analytical counterparts. Z. Kneže-vić & A. Milani (2019) found that both methods provide similar answers, with analytical proper elements always falling well within the computational uncertainties of the synthetic elements. However, they found the analytical method to produce less accurate g and s frequencies than the synthetic method. Perhaps most importantly, they also found that the synthetic method produced the smallest errors in the proper elements for asteroid fam-ily members, which is a primary use of proper elements in dynamical studies; this cemented the superiority of synthetic proper elements over analytical ones. For these reasons, SBDynT uses the synthetic method to calculate proper orbital elements, which we will de-scribe in detail below. We adopt the approach outlined by Z. Knežević & A. Milani (2000), calculating synthetic proper elements guided by the application of secular planetary motion theory. 2.2. Orbit Simulation 

Computing synthetic proper elements requires simu-lating the orbit of a given small-body over a timescale appropriate to the secular evolution of that body, which we do using the rebound n-body integrator (H. Rein & S. F. Liu 2012). SBDynT provides tools to initialize a 

rebound simulation using observed small body orbits from the JPL Small-Body Database 3 via API query; this includes the option to query the orbit-fit uncertainty covariance matrix to generate clones spanning the ob-servational uncertainties. Orbits can also be provided directly by the user. 4 All small bodies (and any clones) are treated as a massless particles in the simulation, and should be given the “asteroid” or “tno” object_type by the user, which will determine the default run properties to be used in the analysis. Users may use custom run properties for their analysis, but we will focus on the de-  

> 3https://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/tools/sbdb_lookup.html#/
> 4The ability to easily calculate proper elements for arbitrary objects is a major advantage of SBDynT over the current use of catalogs or significant user dynamical expertise.

fault settings in this section, which have been selected to be effective for the analysis of these objects. As part of the initialization process, SBDynT queries the precise positions and velocities of the major planets to be included in the simulation at the epoch of the ob-ject’s best-fit orbit from JPL Horizons 5 (J. D. Giorgini et al. 1996); we query for the heliocentric positions of each planet’s system barycenter (e.g., the barycenter and mass of Jupiter plus its regular moons rather than just Jupiter itself). The masses of each included planet system is taken from JPL’s DE441 ephemerides (the cur-rent basis for Horizons queries; R. S. Park et al. 2021). For major planets that are not going to be included in the integrations (e.g., the terrestrial planets are often ex-cluded from simulations of TNOs to save computational time), SBDynT queries Horizons for those planets’ po-sitions and velocities; the Sun’s position is modified to be the barycenter of the Sun and those missing plan-ets, and their mass is added to the Sun. The user can choose which planets to include, ranging from just the gas giants (the default for TNOs within SBDynT), the seven largest planets (excluding Mercury), or all of the planets. We note that excluding Mercury does not sig-nificantly affect the computed proper elements of either the asteroids or the TNOs, and doing so allows the sim-ulation to be much more efficient; as such, the default setting for asteroid simulations within SBDynT is to ex-clude Mercury 6.SBDynT integrates the simulation for 10 Myr in the case of asteroids and 150 Myr for TNOs; these choices are several times longer than the first-order secular evo-lution timescales for these regions. The integration timestep is selected to be T / 40 years, where T is the orbital period of the shortest period particle, or planet, contained in the simulation; e.g. a TNO simulation con-taining the 4 giant planets would have a timestep of 

TJup /40 ≈ 0.2965 years.            

> 5https://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/horizons/
> 6We compare the proper orbital elements reported for 200 num-bered asteroid simulations which were integrated with and without Mercury, with all other simulation variables remain-ing equal. We find that the reported proper e, I for the as-teroids between the two simulations produce differences which equate to ≈20% of the numerical uncertainty itself. In other words, the choice to not include Mercury in the simulation has a smaller effect on the reported proper elements than the choice of simulation resolution, while speeding up the integra-tion by a factor of ≈2.5.Systematic uncertainties which are of even smaller order than the loss of Mercury (such as the uncertainty in the planetary positions, or happenstance alias-ing effects caused by alignment with the orbital periods of the planets) can also be considered negligible in comparison to the numerical uncertainties of this method.

6By default, the integration is split into two halves, producing both a backwards and a forwards integra-tion. The motivation for using integrations in both di-rections is primarily to retrieve accurate proper ω, Ω an-gles, which are defined at the t = 0 epoch. As we discuss below in Section 2.3, the filtering method performed by SBDynT inherently produces edge effects in the time-series of the filtered proper elements; this can cause the obtained proper ω and Ω angles at the start or end of the time-series to be artificially shifted from their cor-rect locations. By placing the present day at the center of the integrated time period, we avoid the issue of edge effects, and retrieve more accurate proper ω, Ω values. The option is left open to the user to perform only a forwards or backwards integration if they wish, and the proper element computation accommodates for whichever type of integrations is provided. The state of all the bodies in the simulation are saved to a rebound 

SimulationArchive binary file (H. Rein & D. Tamayo 2017) every 500 years for asteroids and every 5,000 years for TNOs by default. This output cadence is chosen to ensure sufficient resolution for most purposes, though even higher resolution runs may be preferred when com-puting proper elements in certain cases, which we will discuss in the next section. SBDynT’s default choice is to use the Mercurius integrator within rebound , which combines the efficiency of the Wisdom-Holman method J. Wisdom & M. Holman (1991) implemented in WH-Fast (H. Rein & D. Tamayo 2015) for most of the orbital evolution with the accuracy of IAS15 (H. Rein & D. S. Spiegel 2015) during close encounters. In practice, proper elements are less meaningful for small bodies experiencing close encounters with plan-ets, so we include a flag indicating close encounters and potential planet-crossing orbits (discussed in greater de-tail in Section-2.5). SBDynT is meant to be a general purpose tool, and users might choose to simulate real or synthetic small body populations that contain a mix of dynamical behaviors. As such, using a hybrid inte-grator by default even for proper element calculations ensures any potential close encounters are simulated ac-curately, and produce final orbits that best represent the real trajectories of the small body. Users who do not need to accurately compute close encounter interac-tions for their test particles have the option to modify their integrator and use WHFast directly 7. This would be a faster computational option if the user is integrat- 

> 7When using the WHFast integrator, users also have the op-tion to turn the WHFast fast mode off, which speeds up the integration speed significantly, as outlined in

ing a set of objects and is uninterested in the final result of the objects which experience close encounters. All of the run properties mentioned above, such as the output cadence, length of integration, and choice of in-tegrator are able to be modified by the user if they wish. Examples of how to run custom integrations for proper element calculation are described in various example notebooks contained in the SBDynT GitHub repository. 2.3. Calculating Synthetic Proper Orbital Elements 

Once an integration is complete, we calculate time se-ries of ⇀

e and ⇀

I (Equation 3) for the small body and all the planets contained in the simulation. For the proper ele-ment calculation, we start from the simulated osculating heliocentric orbital elements rather than barycentric or-bital elements (which is otherwise SBDynT’s default) for consistency with prior catalogs. We then compute the complex Fourier transforms on those arrays, F(⇀

e) and 

F(⇀

I), using the python numpy (C. R. Harris et al. 2020) library’s Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) functionality, a symmetrized algorithm for computing a Discrete Fourier Transform. The FFT decomposes each time series into a discrete set of frequency bins, which are determined by the sampling cadence and total integration time of the series, and returns the corresponding complex am-plitudes for each bin, which contains both the strength and phase of each frequency. This Fourier analysis en-ables us to identify the forcing terms associated with the gravitational influences of all the major planets included in the simulation as notable peaks in the signal. To properly compute the forcing terms we want to remove, it is necessary to first numerically identify the planetary secular frequencies in our simulation. While the secular frequencies of the planets have been defined by analytical secular theory (e.g. D. Brouwer & A. J. J. van Woerkom 1950), these frequencies can vary slightly from the analytically defined values in a numerical sim-ulation (Z. Knežević & A. Milani 2000). This is primar-ily due to 2 reasons: (1) the output from the numerical simulation may not be resolved enough to capture the precise secular frequency, shifting it to the center of the nearest bin, and/or (2) excluding some planets from the simulation can slightly shift the precession frequencies of the remaining planets even when the overall evolu-tion of the small body is not meaningfully affected by the missing planets. In other words, very small changes in the simulated solar system compared to the actual solar system can cause very subtle changes to the full n-body solution, so we need to identify the secular fre-quencies from the simulations themselves; this ensures that the identified secular frequencies correspond to the 7actual forced terms found in the simulated small body’s orbital evolution. In the simplest case, secular frequencies can be identi-fied as peaks in the power spectrum of the Fourier trans-forms F(⇀

ei) and F(⇀

Ii). This is the primary way SB-DynT identifies the planetary secular frequencies from the planet’s individual power spectra, though steps are taken to reduce the influence of massive planets like Jupiter on the frequency identification for smaller plan-ets like Mars. More details on the identification of the planetary secular frequencies are included in Ap-pendix A. For a small body, the peaks associated with planets’ secular frequencies can be used to identify the relative strengths of the individual frequencies in the body’s evo-lution. Conceptually, the proper g and s frequencies for the small body should always correspond to the fre-quency with the highest amplitude signal in the spec-trum. However, there are some limitations with the Discrete Fourier Transform method that cause this to not always be the case. One such effect is “spectral leakage,” which can cause the power of a signal to be spread among several neigh-boring frequency bins (i.e., the signal produces a sinc function in Fourier space, rather than the expected Dirac delta function), lowering the amplitude of the true central frequency. This effect applies to both the small body’s proper frequency and the planetary frequencies present in the signal, and the magnitude of spectral leak-age is a function of the distance of the true frequency from the center of the nearest discrete frequency bin. The width of the leakage is therefore inconsistent, vary-ing for every frequency in the signal. Additionally, if the SSSB is near a secular resonance, ( g ≈ gi or s ≈ si), the amplitude of the planetary frequency can often appear dominant over the true nearby proper frequency, making them difficult to separate. Multiple steps are taken to mitigate these problems. To identify the small body’s proper frequency, we first do a ‘soft’ filter of the planetary secular frequencies from the power spectrum; this is done with a simple division of the planetary secular frequency and the adjoining bins by an empirically determined scalar. This soft filter of the planetary frequencies is less comprehensive than the filter used to compute the proper elements, and is merely done to separate the SSSB proper g, s frequencies from the planetary frequencies that may appear in the sig-nal. Once this is done, the signal is further binned by summing up the power for local regions near the g, s fre-quencies within the power spectra to account for spectral leakage. The peak frequency from the discretized power spectrum is then accepted as the proper frequency. Amore comprehensive description of the full method used by SBDynT to identify the proper frequencies is found in Appendix A. Once the dominant planet and small body secular frequencies have been identified, the forced amplitude terms can be filtered from the small body’s signal, leav-ing only the free or proper amplitudes. The challenge of computing synthetic proper orbital elements is to fil-ter out the forced terms without changing the proper amplitudes. This is challenging for several reasons: 1. The frequency resolution for a Discrete Fourier Transform is determined by the length of the time series and the time separation ∆t between the saved values. Poor time series resolution (large 

∆t) can make precise signal identification difficult, but a high resolution (small ∆t) is more mem-ory intensive and computationally inefficient; sim-ilarly, the total length of the integration is finite and limited by computational considerations. It is important that the filtering done by SBDynT be optimized to balance accuracy and efficiency. 2. For small bodies near or in secular resonances, it is particularly important to ensure that the filtering does not remove power associated with the proper frequency just because that proper frequency is commensurate with a planetary frequency. In these cases, the planetary frequency can be close enough to the proper frequency that it should be considered part of the proper motion of the small body. This is particularly important when spectral leakage causes the proper frequency to be spread out in frequency space. 3. There are non-linear (e.g., higher-order) terms as-sociated with both the proper and forced frequen-cies that contribute to the orbital evolution of the small body. The process of filtering must be sure to preserve the non-linear proper terms, while fil-tering out the non-linear forced terms. See Ap-pendix B for further discussion on where these terms come from and how we identify them. 4. Some non-linear terms that contribute signifi-cantly to the forced orbital evolution have such long periods that very few cycles occur within the length of the simulation; the most relevant exam-ple is the g8 +s8 frequency for TNOs, which has an 

≈ 65 Myr period. Long-period terms like these can inflate the secular average terms at long-period in the Fourier transform, as well as increase the effect of spectral leakage for the dominant terms. 810 3 

> 10 1
> 10 1
> 10 3
> 10 5
> Unfiltered Power

Eccentricity Vector   

> Jupiter
> Saturn
> Uranus
> Neptune
> Venus
> Earth
> Mars
> Proserpina
> 10 3
> 10 1
> 10 1
> 10 3
> 10 5

Inclination Vector         

> 10 410 510 610 7
> Period (years)
> 10 2
> 10 0
> 10 2
> 10 4
> 10 6
> Filtered Power
> g
> 2g
> 3g
> 10 410 510 610 7
> Period (years)
> 10 2
> 10 0
> 10 2
> 10 4
> 10 6s
> 2s
> 3s

Asteroid (46) Proserpina Power Spectra 

Figure 1. The transformed ⇀

e and ⇀

I vectors in frequency space for Asteroid (46) Proserpina before (top panels) and after (bottom panels) filtering. In the top panels, vertical lines indicate forcing frequencies from the 7 planets included in the simulation as well as the peak proper frequency of the asteroid itself. Peaks corresponding to these frequencies are removed by the filter, as desired for the computation of proper elements. In the bottom panels, the proper terms corresponding to the free motion of Proserpina are shown; these terms are preserved in our filtering. There are many additional linear and non-linear forced terms which are also handled are not shown explicitly in this figure. 

To account for these difficulties, SBDynT follows a specific algorithm to protect frequencies that correspond to the SSSB’s proper terms, while also averaging or smoothing the contributed power across the rest of the signal, effectively preserving the proper amplitudes of the secular motion. This is in contrast to some methods for filtering out forced terms by zeroing out the power at the planetary secular frequencies, which risks remov-ing power in the signal which corresponds to the proper motion, again due to spectral leakage. SBDynT first identifies the linear and non-linear secular terms for the small body to protect, and for the planets, which will be removed; a description of the terms SBDynT specif-ically identifies can be found in Appendix B. We follow the method of A. Milani & Z. Knezevic (1994) and in-clude in our filter all of the linear through 4th-order secular terms that could be relevant to the small bodies in our filter. SBDynT produces a mask of the signal for the proper frequency and nearby bins to avoid any loss of the proper motion contained in these regions. The mask protects the dominant term by a width of decimal-exponent 8 (dex) = 0.20, and the higher order terms by a width of dex = 0.01; these widths were chosen em-pirically to reduce the computed proper element uncer-tainties, and improve the computed proper elements as compared to the published catalogs. There still exist cases where a secular planetary fre-quency lies within this empirically determined mask, in-dicating that the small body lies near a planetary secu-lar resonance. To account for these nearby frequencies, a check is done to identify any nearby planetary secular resonance frequencies that fall into the protected mask. If any forced frequencies are identified as falling into the mask, a small number of bins centered at the planetary frequency are removed from the mask, allowing the filter be applied to those frequencies. When frequencies are close enough to the proper frequency that the object is in a secular resonance, those frequencies are not filtered           

> 8The decimal-exponent (dex) is a useful measure of distance in frequency space, which is represented primarily on a log scale. As an example, using a dex = 0.2 to produce a mask centered at a frequency fi= 10 −3yr −1would have a frequency range of  fi−10 log 10 (fi)−0.2, f i+ 10 log 10 (fi)+0 .2, or (10 −3.2,10 −2.8)
> yr −1.

9out at all, and are considered part of the proper motion of the small body. Once the identification of protected and filtered fre-quencies is complete, one last step exists before filtering is applied: accounting for any unwanted short-period terms in the simulation. In most cases, the amplitudes of the short-period terms are small, and there is no need to account for them during the filtering process. However, there are cases, such as objects near mean-motion res-onances, where short-period terms are quite significant and ought to be filtered out. This is especially prevalent for objects with one or more short-period terms near the Nyquist frequency; this can artificially enhance the size of some non-secular frequencies which do not represent the proper motion of the object. However, the danger of filtering out short-period terms is that they can overlap with higher-order proper terms that we wish to keep. To avoid this, SBDynT first de-termines the shortest-period significant proper secular frequency present in the object’s evolution. For our 4th-order model, this is primarily the 4g or 4s frequency which is dependent on the proper motion of the small body itself. We note that these values are rarely shorter than the 2g6 − 2s6 frequency, which is the fastest rele-vant 4th order secular frequency among the Solar Sys-tem planets, and occurs with a period of ∼ 11 , 800 years. SBDynT places a ceiling on the power of every term that has a period < 1/10 of the shortest-period secular term; the ceiling is set equal to the power of the spectrum at 

fi = (4 g or 4s) × 10 , or the lower limit of the short-period frequencies. We note that in previous studies, the short-period terms are handled differently than they are in our method. When computing proper elements for aster-oids, Z. Knežević & A. Milani (2000) reports that their OrbFit code uses a digital filter on an initial set of “in-put” orbital elements sampled at a rate of 2 years and returns a set of filtered “output” orbital elements sam-pled at a rate of 200 years. Their proper element com-putation is then performed on this set of output orbital elements. Due to how finely sampled their sample of orbital elements is, their digital filter is very effective at capturing short-period terms present in the simulation. Implementing this in the present form of SBDynT and 

REBOUND would have significant other negative con-sequences in terms of efficiency and/or memory, so we do not follow their method of digital filtering the orbital elements arrays; we will show later that our filtering method still produces proper elements comparable to those reported by OrbFit. In contrast to SBDynT and Z. Knežević & A. Milani (2000)’s handling of the short-period terms, D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) states that they do not filter out short-period terms at all, because the effect is found to be negligible in their testing. We will discuss our findings on the impact of the short-period filter on the proper elements later in Section 4. Once the short-period filter has been applied, SB-DynT applies a gaussian convolution filter using Scipy’s 

gaussian_filter1d (E. Jones et al. 2001) to the log of the power spectrum. The kernel of the gaussian fil-ter, which describes how widely the filter should sample nearby bins for averaging, is selected based on the size of the proper frequency which is saved. An object with a longer-period proper frequency is thus filtered with a larger kernel, and a shorter period proper frequency is given a small kernel. A benefit to this method is that it can account for higher-order terms that typically are not specifically fil-tered out by previous methods, as the gaussian kernel is applied across the entire power spectrum, with the exception of any protected frequencies. The protected regions near the proper frequency and its associated higher-order terms are then placed back into the signal using the previously-built protected mask. The filtered power spectrum is then representative of the amplitude of the free or proper motion that is contained in the signal. An example of this filtering method is shown in Figure 1, where the peak frequencies of the perturb-ing planets can be identified in the Fourier space of the unfiltered ⇀

e and ⇀

I vectors for Asteroid (46) Proserpina, an object selected at random. in the final filtered vec-tors (bottom panels), the protected frequencies are in-dicated, with the rest of the spectrum appearing to be largely smoothed out. An inverse Fourier transform is then used to convert the filtered Fourier-space vector ˆf into the filtered eccen-tricity or inclination vector, ⇀

ef iltered or ⇀

If iltered . These vectors can be decomposed into the small body’s filtered time-evolution in e, I, ω and Ω. At this point, while this filtering of the planetary secular frequencies from the ⇀

e

and ⇀

I vectors effectively removed the dominant linear frequencies from the vector, non-linear secular frequen-cies which appear only in the eccentricity or inclination evolution may still remain. These non-linear secular fre-quencies which result from combinations of the proper 

g, s frequencies and the gi, s i planetary frequencies are phase modulated when the ⇀

e, ⇀

I vectors are formed, caus-ing the signal from these non-linear frequencies to be contained within the proper signal of the vectors them-selves and thereby avoid being filtered out. While the residual amplitude of these non-linear terms is generally quite small, and has no impact on the fi-nal proper reported proper elements if the full period 10 of the non-linear term is captured by the simulation, these terms can produce larger proper element uncer-tainties for near-resonant objects, as we will discuss in Section-2.4. To avoid this, SBDynT runs an identical filter as previously described on the filtered eccentricity and inclination time-arrays, with the added requirement to protect the 0-bin value, or the mean value, of the time arrays. Details describing this additional filter and its impact on secularly resonant objects are described in Appendix-C.2. Typical to signal filtering, there is often visible con-tamination at the edges of the resulting reconstructed time series (see Figure 2). Thus, while SBDynT could report the mean value of this final array as the proper element, SBDynT applies two final steps to compute the final resulting proper element. First, the first 2.5% of the filtered time arrays are re-moved, as seen in Figure-2, to disregard the edge effects present. However, edge effects vary in magnitude, and some edge effects may still exist in the array, which cor-rupt the mean value. Then, to minimize any remaining edge-effect values within the filtered time-arrays, a Hann window function is applied to the filtered e, I time arrays. This win-dow function effectively decreases the weight of varia-tion near the edges of the time-array, and increases the weight of the motion near the center, which is expected to be more numerically stable after filtering. The sum of the windowed e, I arrays is then divided by the sum of the Kaiser window itself, thereby producing an effective de-weighted mean of the time-array; the resulting value is the reported proper element by SBDynT. SBDynT also reports proper ω and Ω angles, which are defined as the values of these angles at t = 0 in the filtered ⇀

e, ⇀

I arrays, with ω computed as the difference of the proper Ω − ϖ. As such, the reported proper ω

and Ω angles are dependent on the defined t = 0 , and for a default run will correspond to the epoch of the best-fit orbit used to initialize the simulation. We note that because of the edge effects introduced by filtering, accurate proper ω, Ω angles can only be defined for inte-grations where the t = 0 time is neither the beginning or end of the simulation, and is why SBDynT has the de-fault setting for simulations to integrate both backwards and forwards in time. Typically, best-fit orbits for real objects contained in the MPC are defined with respect to some epoch be-tween the present day and the J2000 epoch; the evo-lution of the slow-moving orbital angles for orbits on this timescale is negligible, and can typically be ignored in the interest of understanding the present day orbital shape and orientation. Users who run simulations of synthetic particles should be aware of what their t = 0 

time represents, however. If the user wishes to repre-sent some past or future state of the solar system, such as when searching for or modeling the evolution of colli-sional families or primordial small body populations, the resulting proper angles will instead represent the angles at that defined epoch with respect to the locally forced plane. 0.060     

> 0.080
> 0.100
> 0.120
> 0.140
> 0.160
> 0.180
> Ecc
> Unfiltered Array
> Filtered Array
> 42024
> 0.000
> 1.000
> 2.000
> 3.000
> 4.000
> 5.000
> Inc ( )
> Proper Element
> Mean Element

Time (Myr) 

Asteroid (46) Proserpina  

> Figure 2. Eccentricity and Inclination time arrays for As-teroid (46) Proserpina, before (blue) and after (orange) SB-DynT filtering. Black lines indicate the 2.5% cutoff for pro-ducing the proper element from the mean of the filtered value. The red and green horizontal lines indicate the mean of the osculating elements and the proper elements, respec-tively.

Computing the proper semi-major axis of an SSSB’s orbit is much simpler; Z. Knežević & A. Milani (2000) found that secular planetary influence on semi-major axis evolution are all high-order terms, and for the most part only short-period effects can contribute on a large-scale to the semi-major axis evolution (A. Milani et al. 1987). Our testing indicates something similar, with short-period variation dominating the greater orbital evolution, centered on the mean. For this reason, SB-DynT applies the same gaussian_filter1d to the semi-major axis, and only protects the longest period fre-quencies. Thus the mean of the semi-major axis is pre-served, while the high-frequency evolution is restrained. The proper semi-major axis is then found by taking the 11 mean of the smoothed semi-major axis time array, sim-ilar to the proper e and I, but without searching for signals in the frequency space corresponding to the per-turbing planets. We note that the choice of providing the osculating el-ements in either the heliocentric or barycentric reference frame (or even in the Jacobi coordinates of the simula-tion) has effectively no impact on the computed proper 

e, I values of the small body. For the eccentricity, the signal added to the osculating eccentricity of the small body and the planets with respect to the orbital center appears almost entirely as a short period term in the eccentricity, which is captured inherently by SBDynT’s short-period filter discussed earlier in this Section. The inclination is entirely detached from the choice of the or-bital center, and is only dependent on the choice of the reference plane, whether that be the invariable plane or the ecliptic plane. In addition, because it is of such short period, the impact of the selected central coordi-nate frame on the reported planetary proper precession frequencies is below the numerical uncertainty of the frequency determination itself. However, as the proper a is computed as simply the mean of the osculating a, there is a subtle shift in the reported proper a depending on the selected reference frame. SBDynT by default integrates the orbit and com-putes the proper elements in the barycentric reference frame; users should be aware then that the proper a

reported by SBDynT may be slightly offset from the proper a reported by other catalogs which report their proper elements in the heliocentric frame. We note that certain SSSB’s may exhibit orbits that are dominated by the forced terms of the planets, mak-ing traditional proper orbital element calculation chal-lenging. This is often the case for resonant orbits—both mean-motion and secular—which can strongly influence the long-term evolution of small body orbits. A discus-sion of these effects and of how SBDynT reports the “mean” elements for resonant objects will be discusses further in Section 2.5. 2.4. Proper Element Uncertainties 

Z. Knežević & A. Milani (2000) mention that one of the most significant advantages of computing synthetic over analytical proper elements is the ability to compute the uncertainty of the computed proper element. This is done by looking at the variability of the filtered ele-ments between different time segments of the simulation. SBDynT follows the method of computing proper ele-ment uncertainties outlined in Z. Knežević & A. Milani (2000) (also adopted by D. Nesvorný et al. 2024): we di-vide the simulation into five overlapping time windows, each covering 33% of the simulation length. SBDynT then recomputes the proper elements for the small body for each of these windows by running the filtering al-gorithm, re-identifying the proper g and s frequencies, and computing the mean of the filtered e and I values in the same method as described in the previous section. The uncertainty for the proper element is then taken to be the standard deviation of the reported proper ele-ments from the five windows. One can imagine that sta-ble objects will have proper elements that remain very constant over the course of the simulation, producing very small uncertainties, whereas SSSBs with chaotic or strongly evolving orbits will produce larger uncertain-ties. In this way, these uncertainties can be seen and used as indicators of the stability of the SSSB’s orbit over secular timescales. We note that these uncertainties do not incorporate observational uncertainties, nor do they include system-atic uncertainties due to various reasonable choices by different authors in how proper elements are calculated. Users that desire to account for the observational uncer-tainties propagated into a small body’s orbital evolution can compute multiple sets of proper elements for the same object by simulating several clones of the object. While the uncertainty described above gives key insights into the orbital stability of the best-fit orbit, computing proper elements for several clones would similarly mea-sure the variability or chaotic nature of the object’s or-bit. We will address effects on the uncertainties due to choices during the filtering method by the authors later on in our discussion of the results in Section 4. 2.5. Mean Elements 

As discussed above, there are a number of SSSB’s with evolution strongly influenced or dominated by secular and/or mean motion resonant effects. Computing the proper or free elements for such objects can be difficult for two reasons: 1. Chaotic Motion: Mean motion resonant objects can experience non-periodic (chaotic) evolution in eccentricity and inclination over a wide range of timescales, including both shorter and longer than the secular timescales described previously (Sec-tion 2.1). Such variability can make it very diffi-cult or impossible to define proper orbital elements for these objects for timescales of interest for dy-namical studies. 2. Long-Period Terms: In some regions of orbital pa-rameters, higher order secular resonances can oc-cur. Examples of these include asteroids for which 

g + s ≈ g6 + s6, or g + s ≈ j(g6 + s6) reso-nances, where j is an integer (e.g. A. Milani & 12 Z. Knezevic 1992; Z. Knežević & A. Milani 2000; V. Carruba et al. 2014, 2018) and TNOs for which 

g +s ≈ g8 +s8 resonance (Z. Knežević & A. Milani 2003). Proximity to a higher-order secular reso-nance can produce long period coupled variations in eccentricity and/or inclination on timescales much longer than the secular timescales described in Section 2.1. These coupled long period varia-tions are challenging to filter out, especially when the periods are comparable to the length of the integrations. Figures 3 and 4 show examples of a chaotic mean-motion resonant object and a higher order secular resonant ob-ject, respectively. In the case of the mean motion resonant object (Fig-ure 3), we can see a high frequency component in the eccentricity and an overall chaotic variation. The high frequency component is due to the 3:2 mean motion res-onance librations, which occur intermittently and with variable amplitude. In this case, the proper element computation fails to effectively filter out any significant amount of signal from the eccentricity and inclination evolution over time. As such, the proper elements com-puted in each of the windows (indicated in the figure) vary significantly, producing larger uncertainties in the returned proper elements. We note that accommodating for mean-motion reso-nances in computing proper elements has been discussed in the literature, and specialized semi-analytical meth-ods can accurately produce the proper elements for small bodies near resonance (G. F. Gronchi & A. Milani 2001). Similarly, special methods exist for calculating proper elements for planet-crossing populations (M. Fenucci et al. 2022). We emphasize that in its current release, the default SBDynT settings are only recommended for computing proper elements for main-belt asteroids and for TNOs with q > 34 AU, which avoid planet-crossing orbits. To help users identify potential planet-crossing objects and scattered objects, SBDynT includes two flags in the outputs. The first flag, which identifies po-tential planet-crossing orbits, takes the form of a sim-ple boolean which is labeled as “True” if a simulated small body experiences at some point in the integra-tion an orbit with q < 1.7, Q > 4.0 AU for an aster-oid, or q < 34 AU for a TNO. The second flag, to help identify potential scattering events for an object, is computed using the array of |∆a/a | values over the small body’s orbital simulation. This flag is reported as “True” for asteroids with a |∆a/a | > 2.5% , and for TNOs with |∆a/a | > 0.5% , indicating that at some point throughout the output orbit, there was some sig-nificant energy exchange between the small body at the perturbing planet, greater than any potential variance due to the solar system barycentric motion, or adiabatic energy exchanges which are common, and don’t neces-sarily produce new orbits for the small body. While not a perfect indicator of scattering effects, this indicator generally performs well at identifying objects which ex-change large amounts of energy with perturbing planets. We note that both of these flags are computed from the saved outputs of the simulation, and are not com-puted at a timestep level during the simulation itself. Considering the high output cadence of the default simu-lations, however, these flags perform adequately at iden-tifying potential scattering and planet-crossing orbital evolution for the small bodies. The theory and computation of proper elements is fo-cused on long-term non-resonant secular perturbations and quickly becomes meaningless for objects having close encounters with planets or even just on planet-crossing orbits. There are still cases when computing the proper elements using SBDynT for weakly-resonant objects or planet-crossing objects can still be effective, such as in the case of weakly resonant objects, or sta-ble von Zeipel-Lidov-Kozai (vZLK) librators like Pluto, which have their secular motion largely preserved over secular timescales T. Ito & R. Malhotra (2025). These secularly-stable objects can generally be identified by measuring the reported numerical uncertainties which result from the proper element computation. This can only occur when the small body’s proper motion is preserved, rather than being overwritten by the mean-motion forced terms of the perturbing planet. Cases like these are generally the exception to the rule, making the computation of proper elements for mean-motion reso-nant orbits a challenge. In its current stage of development, SBDynT does not produce specialized proper orbital elements for mean motion resonant or planet crossing small bodies, though implementation for these cases is possible, especially considering the open-source nature of our codebase. In contrast, the evolution of the secularly resonant TNO (Figure 4) is more regular, and the filter ade-quately accounts for the linear first order g8 and s8 fre-quencies present in its evolution, as well as a number of higher-order secular frequencies. However, because the filtering is performed separately on the complex eccen-tricity and inclination vectors, the non-linear coupling between the secular frequencies that generates residual long-period modulations in e and I cannot be removed by the filter applied to the ⇀

e, ⇀

I vectors. We emphasize the fact that, in the case of 2019 QQ110, the secular resonant terms are of such long period that the default 150 million year integration would only capture approx-13 0.200         

> 0.220
> 0.240
> 0.260
> Ecc
> Unfiltered Array
> Filtered Array
> 80 60 40 20 020 40 60 80
> 2.000
> 4.000
> 6.000
> 8.000
> Inc ( )
> Window Elements
> Proper Element
> Time (Myr)

TNO (47171) Lempo 

Figure 3. TNO (47171) Lempo’s eccentricity and inclina-tion evolution over time; the chaotic evolution is the result of Lempo’s occupation within 3:2 mean motion resonance with Neptune. Separating the proper elements from the forced elements is therefore noticeably difficult, with per-turbations from Neptune dominating the orbit. The final reported proper element resulting from our filtering routine is nearly equal to the simple mean of the unfiltered time ar-ray. The individual computed proper element for each of the five time windows is shown, highlighting how chaos affects the uncertainty measurement. 

imately half of the full secular period. If the length of the integration is extended over a longer timescale that is sufficient to capture the a full secular cycle, the un-certainty measurements can improve from the proper element computation, as is shown in Appendix-C.2. The long period effects of secular resonance have been discussed in the literature, with methods being pro-posed to accommodate for these effects when defining the proper elements. The two primary methods include (1) reporting the mean of the filtered elements along with the amplitude of variation corresponding to the critical argument (A. Milani & Z. Knezevic 1992), or (2) using semi-analytical methods similar to those pro-posed for computing proper elements in mean motion resonance (A. Morbidelli 1993). Due to these two variations of orbital evolution, rather than reporting the final output from the filtering algo-rithm as a proper element, instead SBDynT reports the result as a “mean” element, indicating that the provided result is some average of the residual variation that is still present in the filtered element. To identify “mean” 0.060         

> 0.070
> 0.080
> 0.090
> 0.100
> Ecc
> Unfiltered Array
> Filtered Array
> 80 60 40 20 020 40 60 80
> 4.000
> 5.000
> 6.000
> 7.000
> 8.000
> 9.000
> Inc ( )
> Window Elements
> Proper Element
> Time (Myr)

TNO 2019 QQ110 

Figure 4. TNO 2019 QQ110’s eccentricity and inclination evolution over a 150 Myr integration. The g + s − g8 − s8 res-onance produces an ≈ 300 Myr long-period term in the evo-lution of this object. While technically periodic, the growth in eccentricity and inclination in this resonance is so slow, it only appears periodic on timescales comparable to the age of the Solar System. Objects even closer to the center of a res-onance would have longer period terms, producing apparent constant adiabatic growth in eccentricity and inclination over the age of the Solar System. Even with an additional filter applied to the inclination time-array, this long-term variation cannot be fully filtered out since it is not resolved by the full integration, artificially increasing the computed proper el-ement uncertainties. Increasing the integration length can better handle this long-period term. 

elements from proper elements, we search for remain-ing variability in the filtered eccentricity and inclination arrays. This is done by taking the FFT of the filtered eccentricity and inclination arrays, rather than the com-plex vectors. We remind the reader that the filtered inclination array is defined with respect to the locally forced plane, and so frequency terms within the filtered inclination array should avoid spurious inclusion of mo-tion induced by the reference plane. If the object has a non-resonant or non-chaotic orbit, SBDynT’s filtering should effectively remove any vari-ability from the eccentricity and inclination over time, leaving only variability within the filtered vector which is related to the ϖ and Ω evolution, which precess at con-stant rates after filtering. As such, the distribution of power in the Fourier transform of the filtered eccentric-ity and inclination time arrays should be concentrated entirely within the 0-bin, which represents the mean of 14 the signal. The fraction of power in the filtered e, I ar-rays contained outside of the 0-bin can thus be used to identify the level of remaining variability of the eccen-tricity or inclination, indicating whether the element can be considered mean or proper. Through empirical testing with comparison to the AstDys 2024 TNO catalog, which only reports proper elements, we define a mean element for cases where the total power contained outside of the 0-bin for the FFT of the filtered e, I arrays is greater than 2.5 × 10 −5, where the power represents the square of the associated ampli-tude of each signal. In other words, mean elements are defined for objects where the leftover maximum possible amplitude of variation in the filtered e, sin (I) time ar-rays exceeds a value of 0.005 ; as all possible values must line within 0 < e, sin (I) < 1, variation as large as 0.005 

indicates some significant variability is present. Cases may exist where the mean element may is a value very close to 0; in these cases, while the leftover variation may be small relative to the full range of possi-ble values, it may be large relative to the proper element itself. In these cases, SBDynT also reports a mean el-ement for objects where the the leftover amplitude of variation in the filtered e, I time arrays exceeds 20% of the mean value of the array. Using these criteria, SBDynT can define mean ele-ments for all objects with significant leftover variability either relative to the total possible range of eccentric-ities and inclinations, or relative to the mean element itself, which are reported in a dictionary of various flags and indicators related to possible stability and resonance terms associated with the small body orbits. We emphasize that the process of filtering for mean elements is identical to that of the proper elements; ob-jects which are defined as having mean elements simply satisfy our criteria of having filtered orbital elements with significant remnant variability. As the e, I elements are defined separately, cases may exist where only one element is reported as a mean element, while the other is reported as a proper element. This is often the case for objects which may be stable or non-resonant in e,while unstable or resonant in I, or vice versa. We mention that long-term variability which is the result of non-linear secular motion can be considered to be a component of the proper motion of the small body orbital evolution. To account for this, SBDynT reports the amplitude of the remaining variability in the filtered eccentricity and inclination arrays, as well as the highest-amplitude frequency contained within these now filtered time arrays as additional values contained within a dictionary of flags and indicators relevant to the small body’s proper motion. For secularly resonant or near-resonant objects, this reported amplitude and frequency are thus components of the actual proper motion of the object. As such, mean elements may still provide helpful in-sights into the secular dynamics of many small bodies. These mean elements are still a useful metric in un-derstanding the secular dynamics of these bodies; for ex-ample, such averaging causes objects that are captured in the same resonance to appear tightly clustered in or-bital semi-major axis, causing resonances to stand out in plots of the proper elements. Indeed, objects which are given “mean” elements rather than proper elements are almost guaranteed to either have some resonant in-teraction in their orbits, or display chaotic evolution. As such, mean elements, combined with an understanding of the orbital dynamics within a region of phase space, can provide context for whether objects lie in or near resonances of any kind. SBDynT’s code for computing proper and mean ele-ments is written by default to perform the process of orbital solution gathering, secular frequency identifica-tion, and proper element filtering directly from an SB-DynT simulation. However, more advanced users with their own orbital solutions computed by other methods will still have the option in SBDynT to produce proper elements by inputting the orbital element time arrays directly into the filtering function; examples of this will be included in the Proper Element Tutorial Notebooks found in the SBDynT GitHub repository.  

> 3.

STABILITY INDICATORS Chaos refers to a dynamical system’s sensitive de-pendence on initial conditions, where small variations can lead to significantly different long-term behaviors. Chaos can be technically defined as an exponential di-vergence of trajectories due to even infinitesimal changes to the initial conditions of an orbit, with an associated exponential growth timescale. In the context of orbital mechanics, “stability indicators”, (more often referred to in the literature as “chaos indicators”), are quantitative metrics that reveal whether an orbit exhibits chaotic (exponential divergence) or regular (non-exponential di-vergence) characteristics. These indicators can provide helpful insights into the underlying mechanisms of dy-namical evolution. Including stability indicators in the analysis of orbital dynamics serves a critical scientific purpose. Objects with chaotic orbits often lose coher-ence or predictability in their orbital trajectories, mak-ing them unreliable in tracing the origins or predicting the future evolution of a system. For example, if a sys-tem exhibits chaotic divergence in orbital trajectories within just 1 million years, it cannot be used to draw 15 conclusions about solar system formation. Furthermore, using multiple stability indicators is essential for tailor-ing analyses to specific scientific objectives. Each indi-cator is sensitive to distinct aspects of chaotic behav-ior, providing a complementary toolkit that can be cus-tomized to interpret dynamical processes across a wide array of analyses. To assess the chaotic behavior of SSSBs in our sim-ulations, we employ five distinct stability indicators in SBDynT. These indicators provide insights into the dy-namical stability of orbits over different timescales. Be-low, we describe each indicator and the methodology used in our simulations. I. Root Mean Square of the Residuals of Or-bital Elements 

The first stability indicator we use is the root mean square (RMS) of the residuals of the orbital ele-ments of multiple clones sampling an initial orbit and its uncertainty range, providing a measure of how the orbital evolution diverges over time. SB-DynT initializes a simulation with 5 clones of an observed object with orbital elements drawn from the covariance matrix associated with that object’s best-fit orbit (see Section 2.2); each clone thus has slightly different initial conditions. The integra-tion is propagated for the default length for an asteroid or TNO, and the RMS value is computed from the residual of each clone’s evolution from the best-fit orbit’s evolution for the key orbital parameters, semi-major axis, e, and I. Because this indicator relies on the uncertainty in the orbit fit, this indicator effectively measures the unpre-dictability/chaos over the currently known orbit fit range; orbital evolution could be subject to sig-nificant change if the orbit is initially poorly con-strained, so caution should be used when interpret-ing this indicator for newly discovered objects. We flag these indicators if the RMS exceeds 1% of the initial semi-major axis, eccentricity, or sine of the inclination, indicating a high degree of divergence among the clones, suggestive of chaotic dynamics. II. Distance Metric (dmet ) from Proper Ele-ment Uncertainties 

This stability indicator is produced from the un-certainties of the proper element computation. Large uncertainties in the proper element filter-ing can result from chaotic evolution; this is often short-term or secular periodic evolution that is so long it is under-sampled by the length of the sim-ulation (see Section 2.5). Following the example of D. Nesvorný et al. (2024), we can measure the magnitude of the proper element uncertainties us-ing the distance metric between two particles in-troduced by V. Zappala et al. (1990): 

dmet = ni ai

s

54

 δa

ai

2

+ 2( δe)2 + 2( δinc )2 (6) where δ indicates the difference in proper elements between the two particles, and ni and ai are the mean values of their proper mean motion and proper semi-major axes. The value of the metric itself is the relative velocities (reported in m s −1)between the two objects in proper orbital phase space. Rather than comparing two separate small bodies, the distance metric can also be modified to indicate the stability of the proper element cal-culation for an single object by taking each δ term to be the proper element uncertainty, and ai and 

ni to be the proper semi-major axis and mean mo-tion. D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) uses this distance metric to measure the numerical stability of their proper element calculation and to compare their results to the B. Novaković et al. (2022) proper element catalog. We do a similar comparison be-tween catalogs and include a discussion later on in Section 4.1.1. When searching for collisional families in the aster-oid belt, a relative velocity cutoff is implemented by the clustering algorithm. This cutoff effec-tively defines a boundary to the collisional family in a, e, I parameter space. For an asteroid’s colli-sional family membership to be considered statis-tically significant, the asteroid must have a com-puted dmet from the proper element uncertainties which lies below the relative velocity cutoff for the family. This cutoff differs depending on the dy-namical circumstances of the individual collisional family, but most studies place this cutoff at a value of 10 < d met < 100 m/s (A. Milani et al. 2014; D. Nesvorný et al. 2015, 2024). As for TNOs, an in-depth study on the potential detectability of TNO collisional families by R. A. Marcus et al. (2011) found that, due to the typi-cal dispersion velocities produced by collisions in the classical belt, the typical relative velocity cut-off for a TNO collisional family is expected to lie above dmet > 100 m/s. They conclude that dis-covering TNO families by clustering of the relative distance metric velocities is unlikely to provide no-table results until the TNO catalog is increased significantly. 16 However, in the interest of chaos and stability, we find that the dmet uncertainties for TNOs in the current catalog are found to generally consist of a similar dmet distribution as the asteroid belt, with approximately half of the currently known TNOs having a dmet < 10 m/s (See Figures 6 and 8). SBDynT thus follows this implementation in the resulting stability indicator flags produced by the 

dmet for both asteroids and TNOs. Using this cri-teria, SBDynT labels objects with a dmet < 10 m/s as stable, 10 < d met < 100 m/s as metastable, and 

dmet > 100 m/s as unstable. We note that an object’s dmet indicator can be reportedly high for both objects in stable secu-lar resonances, which display very predictable but slow orbital evolution, as well as for more chaotic objects. These could include mean motion reso-nant objects, some of which may remain bounded and stable, but evolve unpredictably. The user can separate stable secular resonant objects from chaotic mean motion resonance objects by consid-ering the reported g and s frequencies from the proper element computation; for example, TNOs with g − g8 ≈ 0, s − s8 ≈ 0 or g + s − g8 − s8 ≈ 0

would be in or near these secular resonances. A visual look at the reported proper semi-major axis of an object can also serve as a clear indi-cation of whether an object exists in or near a mean-motion resonance; this is because the proper semi-major axis of a mean motion resonant object is typically very well aligned with the semi-major axis associated with the mean motion resonance. III. Information Entropy for Orbital Constants (Shannon Entropy) 

Information entropy, or Shannon entropy (C. E. Shannon & W. Weaver 1949a), provides a statisti-cal measure of the randomness or disorder within a selected dataset χ, and is defined by: 

H = −

> χ

X

> x∈

χp(x) log 10 

 p(x) (7) where p represents the probability density of a se-lected member x within the full dataset. By exten-sion, then, the information entropy can be defined as the sum of the product of probability densities and their log 10 values over the entire parameter space being considered. Information entropy can be used to measure disorder for any kind of dy-namical system; for example J. A. Núñez et al. (1996) measured chaos as the information entropy produced by considering the generalized coordi-nates of the Hamiltonian equations of motion for a small body’s orbit. Similarly, we can measure the chaotic evolution of a small body’s orbit by computing the information entropy from the spe-cific angular momentum, hs = pa(1 − e2); hs is a constant over time in linear secular evolution, so deviations in hs indicate non-linear effects in an object’s orbital evolution, which is often asso-ciated with chaotic motion. SBDynT starts by producing a histogram of the hs

vectors over the length of an entire rebound sim-ulation of the best-fit orbit for the small body (10 Myr for an asteroid and a 150 Myr for a TNO). The number of bins used to sample hs over the full time array is simply 1/10 of the length of the array. If the hs array were perfectly evenly dis-tributed, this would result in exactly 10 time sam-ples per bin in the histogram. SBDynT produces a probability density for each bin by normalizing the sample over the nbins . The information en-tropy value can then be calculated from these per-centages using Equation 7 and compared to the the maximum possible value for the given simu-lation length, log 10 (nbins ); the final reported en-tropy value is J = H/log 10 (nbins ), sometimes re-ferred to as the relative entropy C. E. Shannon & W. Weaver (1949b). Minor changes in hs over the simulation are ex-pected due to normal dynamical and numerical limitations, even for regular motion; however, such changes are expected to be randomly distributed across the very small range, which should lead to an even distribution. Large values of this indicator reflect relatively constant hs, indicating stability; smaller values indicate a skewed sample, indicat-ing instability. IV. Autocorrelation Function Index (ACFI) 

The Autocorrelation Function Index (ACFI) was introduced as a potential stability indicator by (V. Carruba et al. 2021). ACFI is calculated by tak-ing the Pearson correlation coefficient (or Pear-son index) for the semi-major axis of a small body against itself at a number of time shifts. The Pear-son index ranges between 1 and -1, where 1 indi-cates perfectly correlated values, and -1 indicates perfectly anti-correlated values. In SBDynT, we use the ACFI as a long-term stability indicator considered over the entire integration span. To calculate it, we compute the Pearson coefficient for the first 10% of the semi-major axis array to 17 sliding 10% segments within the range of 70%-90% of the array (incrementing segments by single ar-ray elements). V. Carruba et al. (2021) found that the specific choice of the selected ranges does not significantly affect the computed ACFI for chaotic orbits with bounded motion; we chose our ranges to capture chaotic evolution that tends to present itself later in the simulations such as scattering events or long-term diffusion. We take the ACFI to be the mean of the abso-lute value of the full set of the computed Pearson indices. Objects that are well correlated, or have low chaos, will have ACFI values closer to 1, while more chaotic objects will have smaller values. In SBDynT, the ACFI flag will be triggered for ob-jects with an ACFI of 0.75 or less, indicating that the orbit demonstrates non-periodic evolution for more than half of the selected timescale. V. Eccentricity and Inclination Vector Power Distribution 

Chaos is sometimes described as unpredictable evolution, so chaotic motion is inherently non-periodic. Therefore, any method which measures the level of periodicity in motion over time can also be a measure of the chaos. The Fourier transform is an effective means of measuring the amplitude distribution of the frequencies present in a signal. While the Fourier transform of a perfectly periodic signal would contain all of its signal in a single fre-quency, non-periodic motion would show the mix-ing of many signals at different frequencies. We can thus use the power spectra of the eccentricity and inclination vectors (already calculated to de-termine proper elements) to measure the level of non-periodicity, or chaos, contained in the signal. We define this stability indicator as the fraction of the total power of the unfiltered eccentricity and inclination vectors that is contained in the small body’s proper g or s frequencies; we take this to be the sum of the four bins nearest to g, s (to ac-count for spectral leakage) divided by the sum of the entire power spectrum. For stable objects with regular motion, the total power should be overwhelmingly concentrated in the proper g and s frequencies; in contrast, ob-jects which are unstable or are near resonances, will have less of their total power contained within their proper frequencies. We note that similarities appear at first glance be-tween this indicator and the power distribution values discussed in Section 2.5 used to define mean elements. However, this stability indicator differs from the mean element power criteria in two signif-icant ways. First, this power distribution indicator measures the relative fraction of power contained in the primary or dominant g, s frequencies, rather than in the 0-bin. Second, this indicator is com-puted on the unfiltered ⇀

e, ⇀

I, rather than the fil-tered e, I time arrays. This indicator can thus be considered a measure of how coherent the orbit’s full secular motion is, including both the linear and non-linear effects from the planets; in contrast, the mean element power criteria captures the ampli-tude of variability that exists when linear effects have been filtered out. Non-linear secular motion involves coherent evo-lution between e, ϖ and I, Ω, meaning the power distribution for secularly resonant objects will be primarily contained in the dominant g and s fre-quencies of the ⇀

e, ⇀

I vectors; so while both this in-dicator and the mean element power comparison measure chaotic motion, this indicator will less fre-quently identify objects in or near non-linear secu-lar resonances as chaotic. As such, this indicator is preferred in defining chaotic orbits which display instability or are unpredictable. We note that because SBDynT produces integrations with the rebound software, SBDynT integrations pro-duced with the WHFast or IAS15 integrators have built-in support for the popular Lyapunov exponent and MEGNO stability indicators, which the user may im-plement if they wish in their integrations (H. Rein & D. Tamayo 2016). However, we note that those in-dicators are most useful for relatively short integra-tions for a number of reasons including machine preci-sion limitations with repeated normalization over thou-sands of timesteps that can cause both of these indi-cators to exponentially diverge. Considering that the Lyapunov timescale of the solar system planets them-selves is O(10 7) years, (W. B. Hayes 2007; K. Baty-gin & G. Laughlin 2008; G. Brown & H. Rein 2020), the default SBDynT integrations, which have timescales of 10+ Myr, are not well-suited for the native Lya-punov exponent and MEGNO indicators contained in 

rebound . Users interested in short-term chaos and in-stability among small bodies may find better success and efficiency implementing those native chaos indica-tors within rebound , whereas users interested in stabil-ity on secular timescales may find better success using SBDynT’s stability indicators. We note, however, that the longest-term secular evolu-tion of small body orbits, (which induce chaotic effects 18 in the orbital evolution, like scattering from enhanced eccentricity), can occur on these very long timescales. For context, note that Neptune’s apsidal and nodal pre-cession occurs on the order of ≈ 2 Myr, and the com-bined g8 + s8 precession rate of Neptune circulates at a rate of ≈ 70 Myr. TNOs which are strongly dynam-ically impacted by Neptune’s evolution can be subject to significant forcing on ≈ 70 Myr timescales, exceeding the length of the typical Lyapunov timescale which can be computed for a system. While the indicators discussed here can be helpful for identifying chaos in a system, it’s important to note that these only act as diagnostics for understanding the evo-lution of the system; they do not necessarily reveal what that chaos may look like in that particular case. In small-body dynamics, the definition of chaos can change depending on the needs of the researcher; one study may be interested in searching only for objects subject to ejection or collisional events, while another study may be interested in any objects in orbits which are bound to migrate to new regions of dynamical space. This relates directly to SSSBs which experience “bounded” chaos, where they only explore a small part of parame-ter space, but do so unpredictably (e.g., C. D. Murray & S. F. Dermott 1999). Bounded orbits of this type of-ten occur in mean motion resonances, with the objects bound to some range of semi-major axis, eccentricity, and inclination, with forced terms causing the orbit to vary unpredictably within those ranges. An example of this was observed in A. Milani & A. M. Nobili (1992), who found that the asteroid Helga was stably contained in the 7:12 mean motion resonance with Jupiter, yet had a very short Lyapunov timescale. This object was termed to experience "stable chaos" within the bound orbit, and many more such cases exist among the reso-nant small bodies throughout the Solar System. On the other hand, unbounded chaotic orbits involve some type of migration through phase space, often through scatter-ing events or certain resonant encounters with the large planets. Such orbits may remain fixed in one orbital element, like semi-major axis or inclination, but will mi-grate to new orbital phase space among the other orbital elements. Unbounded orbits can even lead to ejection or collision within the time-frame of the simulated tra-jectory. As such, providing different stability indicators can help to differentiate and even identify the different kinds of chaotic evolution present in small-body orbits. We will demonstrate examples of the variety of stabil-ity indicators later in Section 4.3.  

> 4.

RESULTS Here we demonstrate the capabilities of SBDynT by comparing its calculated proper elements to the pub-lished catalogs of D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) for aster-oids and Z. Knežević & A. Milani (2000) for TNOs; we also include the Asteroid Families Portal catalog (B. No-vaković et al. 2022) in the asteroid comparison to bench-mark the consistency of the previously published cata-logs and their methods of proper element computation. We also present a new catalog of proper elements for TNOs, alongside an additional new catalog of stability indicators for these objects. Additional work will be published in an upcoming paper describing some of the results of the new proper element catalog and stability indicators for the TNO region (Spencer et al., in prep). 4.1. Asteroid Proper Elements 

Because it is the most recent asteroid catalog with the most up-to-date orbits, we will make our first asteroid comparisons to the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) catalog. However, it is prudent to first briefly discuss the dif-ferences in methods between SBDynT and D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) in calculating proper elements: 

• Integrator: D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) uses the SWIFT integrator (H. F. Levison & M. J. Dun-can 1994), while SBDynT uses rebound .

• Frequency Identification: D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) uses the Frequency Modified Fourier Trans-form method (M. Šidlichovský & D. Nesvorný 1996) to identify peak frequencies of the planets for filtering, while SBDynT makes use of the numpy 

FFT package and various masking and smoothing techniques to do so. 

• Planets Included: D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) in-cludes all 8 planets in their integration. While SBDynT is capable of including all 8 planets, in this comparison, we fold Mercury into the Sun, and integrate with the remaining 7 planets. 

• Filtered Frequencies: D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) fil-ters just the planetary frequencies gj and sj , while SBDynT also accounts for a number of non-linear secular frequencies, which can be reviewed in Ap-pendix B. 

• Filtering Method: D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) filters out the chosen frequencies by subtracting the sinu-soid using the amplitude and frequency returned by FMFT. SBDynT smooths out all regions in Fourier space not associated with the small body’s secular frequency instead. 19 0.4     

> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> Inc (deg) Residuals  1:3 1:2 2:5 3:7 1:4 Weighted - RMS
> = 1.666 × 10 2°

Asteroid Proper Element Residuals: AF Portal - Nesvorny 2024         

> Unweighted 2-
> Unweighted 1-
> 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75

a(AU)     

> 0.02
> 0.01
> 0.00
> 0.01
> 0.02
> Ecc Residuals
> Weighted - RMS
> = 1.346 × 10 3
> Unweighted 2-
> Unweighted 1-
> 01000 2000 3000

Residuals Histogram      

> 02000 4000 -0.40
> -0.20
> 0.00
> 0.20
> 0.40
> Inc (deg) Residuals  Weighted - RMS
> = 1.744 × 10 2°1:3 1:2 2:5 3:7 1:4

Asteroid Proper Element Residuals: SBDynT - Nesvorny 2024         

> Unweighted 2-
> Unweighted 1-
> 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75

a(AU)    

> -0.02
> -0.01
> 0.00
> 0.01
> 0.02
> Ecc Residuals
> Weighted - RMS
> = 9.634 × 10 4
> Unweighted 2-
> Unweighted 1-
> 02000 4000

Residuals Histogram   

> 02000 4000

Figure 5. Top: Residuals comparing the Asteroid Families Portal Proper Elements against the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) Catalog of the first 10,000 numbered asteroids. Bottom: Residuals comparing SBDynT Proper Elements against the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) Catalog of the first 10,000 numbered asteroids. The error-bars represent the uncertainties reported by D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) in both figures. The unweighted σ is simply the standard deviation in the proper element residuals, and the error-Weighted RMS is described in Equation 8. 20 

• Short-Period Terms: D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) does not filter any short-period terms from their integration, while SBDynT does (see Section 2.3). 

• Proper element window: D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) calculates the proper elements from the mean of a 5 Myr window of the corresponding filtered oscu-lating element. SBDynT uses a 9.5 Myr window instead (discarding the first and last 0.25 Myr to remove edge effects). 

• Data Cadence: D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) uses an integration stepsize of 1.1 days and outputs data every 600 years, while SBDynT uses a stepsize of 5.6 days and outputs data every 1000 years. While most of these differences are very minor, oth-ers could result in noticeable differences in the proper elements in certain regions of orbital space, such as re-gions where non-linear secular frequencies are particu-larly strong or regions where short-period terms become much more substantial. The residuals between the com-pared proper elements are shown in Figure 5, with corre-sponding error-weighted RMS included for each orbital element being: 

vuutP(N 24  

> i

− Si) × σN 24 

> i

P 1 

> σN24
> i

(8) where N 24  

> i

indicates the proper element of object i in the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) catalog, Si indicates the comparison catalog proper element for the same object, and σN 24  

> i

indicates D. Nesvorný et al. (2024)’s proper element uncertainty for that object; the sums are per-formed over the overlapping sets of objects. The error-weighted RMS value is a better indication of the sta-tistical variance between the catalogs than the regular RMS, as highly chaotic objects with large proper el-ement uncertainties can unfairly increase the reported RMS. To benchmark the consistency between SBDynT and the published catalogs, we also compare the proper elements of the sample of the first 10,000 numbered as-teroids which are common to both D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) and the Asteroid Families Portal, which consists of 9544 asteroids in total. The error-weighted RMS values between the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) catalog of proper elements and the Asteroid Families Portal catalog are comparable to the same values contrasting SBDynT to the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) catalog. We note that the largest contribu-tors to the weighted RMS in both proper e and I in the catalog comparisons is driven by a small sample of out-liers with reported uncertainties in the range 10 −4–10 −6

with residuals between catalogs on the order of 10 −1.The inflated weight from the very low uncertainties am-plifies these residuals in the weighted-RMS calculation, as is further discussion in Appendix-C. We note a few features in Figure 5, which shows how the residuals between the computed proper elements of the catalogs differ as a function of semi-major axis. The most noticeable spread in the residuals between SB-DynT and D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) as well as between the Asteroids Family Portal and D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) occurs between the 1:3 mean motion resonance with Jupiter, and the Saturnian s6 resonance (around 2.2 AU), which is known to be primarily responsible for shaping the dynamical architecture of the inner main belt. This region also corresponds to much larger un-certainties in the proper elements, so there is still good overall agreement in the proper elements in this region. We also point out a specific feature visible in the proper e residuals in both catalog comparisons that oc-curs near the 1:2 mean motion resonance with Jupiter. In an investigation of these objects, we find that prox-imity to that resonance generally produces strong short-period frequencies in their e evolution. For some of these near-resonant objects, the short-period terms in Fourier space can be responsible for as much as 1-2% of the to-tal power of the full osculating e. An example is shown in Appendix C.3, which is representative of the objects in this observed region. Filtering out the short-period terms introduces a systematic decrease in the proper ec-centricity of about 1%, explaining the small deviation from the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) values. Small differ-ences among the catalogs such as these should serve as a reminder that while the numerical variations within a specific proper element computation may be small, the choice of frequencies to filter out can still produce sys-tematic differences in the proper elements that exceed the numerical uncertainties of the method itself. 4.1.1. Numerical Precision Comparison 

Having established the accuracy of SBDynT’s proper elements, we next consider the numerical precision of our method by comparing the distribution of the com-puted distance metric stability indicators (Equation 6) for each catalog, as done by D. Nesvorný et al. (2024). Mentioned previously in Section 3, asteroids with a 

dmet > 100 m/s are typically not considered for fam-ily finding, and so any method of computing proper el-ements should theoretically achieve uncertainties that typically lie below this cutoff to be useful for family find-ing. A comparison of the uncertainties measured using this distance metric for each catalog sample is shown as cu-21 mulative density functions in Figure 6. The uncertain-ties reported by SBDynT are generally smaller than the uncertainties reported by the Asteroid Families Portal; the latter is considered sufficient for family finding, so SBDynT will be as well. In comparing both accuracy and precision, we find that there is closer agreement be-tween SBDynT and the recently published D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) catalog than between the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) and B. Novaković et al. (2022) catalogs; dis-crepancies between SBDynT and established catalogs are comparable to the differences between the catalogs themselves. This indicates that SBDynT’s proper ele-ment results are comparable to the methods employed by other proper element catalogs. In addition, differ-ences between the catalogs are almost entirely focused in chaotic regions near mean motion resonances or are systematic, meaning the primary uses of proper elements such as family finding or family age estimates are still valid within each catalog. We also note that while our sampling frequency res-olution was primarily coarser than both of the com-pared catalogs, the closely equivalent results indicate that our method compensates for some of the drawbacks of that, effectively producing good proper elements for a smaller computational cost in both memory and CPU-time. Further discussion and diagnostic plots comparing the three proper element catalogs and a general discus-sion of the accuracy of proper element computation can be found in Appendix C. 4.2. TNO Proper Element Comparison 

The only published full catalog of TNO proper ele-ments is the AstDys catalog 9, which was calculated us-ing the OrbFit software (Z. Knežević & A. Milani 2000). The most recent update to the TNO catalog in AstDys was December 2024, with a selection of 2126 TNOs. These TNOs do not represent the entire observed set of small bodies orbiting beyond Neptune; they were se-lected to fit the criteria for proper element computation. Z. Knežević & A. Milani (2003) specifically mentions that they do not compute proper elements for objects with e > 0.3, as these objects are typically very chaotic. However, there are still a number of objects in the cur-rent AstDys catalog which satisfy having e < 0.3 which are not included. An additional criteria is referenced with respect to asteroids in Z. Knežević & A. Milani (2019), in which they mention removing asteroids from their analysis for which LCE > LCE rc and for which 

σa < 0.0003 AU. It could be that a similar criteria were applied in the case of the TNO catalog, though with a           

> 9https://newton.spacedys.com/astdys2/index.php?pc=5 10 210 110 010 110 210 3
> Distance Metric Indicator d(m/s)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> CDF( d)

Asteroid Distance Metric Uncertainties   

> Nesvorny 2024
> SBDynT
> AFP 2024
> Figure 6. Cumulative distribution functions of the distance metric used in family finding computed using the uncertain-ties reported by the asteroid catalogs. Proper elements for the purpose of family finding are considered trustworthy if the uncertainties correspond to relative velocities below 10 m/s. SBDynT’s uncertainties have a nearly identical distri-bution as the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) catalog, with nearly 60% of the objects we consider falling below this thresh-old, and outperform the Asteroid Families Portal, though the difference is considered minor. Compare to Figure 2 in D. Nesvorný et al. (2024). See also Appendix C for a related figure.

higher σa criteria, as TNO’s are expected to have a more diffusive semi-major axis than the asteroids. Figure 7 shows the residuals between SBDynT’s proper elements and those reported by AstDys, includ-ing the weighted RMS (as described in Section 4.1). Similar to the asteroid comparison, the largest resid-uals between SBDynT and the AstDys catalog occur at mean motion resonances (in this case with Neptune rather than Jupiter), which is to be expected. However, there are also some significant residuals in the Cold Clas-sical belt region (low-e, low-I orbits with a ≈ 42 −46 au) that are large when compared to the associated uncer-tainties from the proper element computation. We find that the largest residuals contributing to the weighted RMS measurement are all Cold Classi-cal objects that are strongly affected by the secular 

g+s−g8 −s8 commensurability with Neptune. Amongst these objects, there are also a number of cases where the reported proper g or s frequencies differ between the cat-alogs by significantly more than the frequency resolution of the FFT methods. As discussed in Section 2.5, objects that exist in or near non-linear secular resonances can li-brate over very long timescales. In the case of these Cold Classical TNOs, they all experience periodic evolution 22 35.0 37.5 40.0 42.5 45.0 47.5 50.0 52.5 55.0       

> -1.50
> -1.00
> -0.50
> 0.00
> 0.50
> 1.00
> 1.50
> Inc (deg) Residuals
> 2:1 4:3 7:5 3:2 5:3 7:4 9:4
> Weighted-RMS
> = 6.833 × 10 2°

TNO Proper Element Residuals: SBDynT-AstDys            

> 35.0 37.5 40.0 42.5 45.0 47.5 50.0 52.5 55.0
> a(AU)
> -0.06
> -0.04
> -0.02
> 0.00
> 0.02
> 0.04
> 0.06
> Ecc Residuals
> Weighted-RMS
> = 3.755 × 10 3
> 0500 1000

Residuals Histogram   

> 0500 1000

Figure 7. Residuals comparing SBDynT Proper Elements against the AstDys Catalog of TNOs, with uncertainties included. This plot restricted to a < 56 AU to display the most relevant details in the TNO belt, even though the AstDys catalog contains objects with amax ≈ 65 AU. Similar to Figure 5, but with different ranges, the largest deviation between the two catalogs occurs at mean motion resonances with Neptune, which is to be expected. 

on the timescale of g8 + s8 ≈ 66 Myr. Because of this, defining the filtered elements as “proper” is difficult, and these objects fall into the “mean” element prescription by SBDynT based on the magnitude of the uncertainties in their filtered elements. In other words, the bulk of the large proper element residuals between SBDynT and the AstDys TNOs are due to secular resonant objects iden-tified by AstDys as having very precise uncertainties, despite having large-amplitude long-period terms in the orbital evolution. Examples of such objects can be found in Appendix C.4, where we further discuss these effects. We note that while the comparison is not shown here, we did make a comparison between SBDynT’s computed proper inclinations and the Y. Huang et al. (2022) cata-log of proper inclinations. We find that there is similar agreement between SBDynT and the Y. Huang et al. (2022) free inclinations as to the catalog comparisons we make above. Overall, we find that the filtering done by SBDynT performs adequately in case of the TNOs. We will include a full exploration of TNO proper elements in a follow-up paper (Spencer et al. in prep). 4.2.1. TNO Catalog Uncertainties 

We present the cumulative distribution functions of the dmet for the TNOs as retrieved from the proper el-ement uncertainties for both the AstDys catalog and SBDynT in Figure 8. As mentioned in Section 3, we find that more than half of all known TNOs have a dmet < 10 m/s, indicating that generally, TNO orbits are well-constrained. We note that below a dmet < 20 m/s, SBDynT generally outperforms the AstDys catalog for the produced TNO proper element uncertainties. However, for dmet > 20 

m/s, the AstDys catalog begins to outperform SBDynT, though very slightly. We find that this is largely due to mean-motion reso-nant objects within our sample which experience more chaotic evolution, especially near the end of the integra-tion, and objects with long-period secular terms which are not fully captured by the integration. Indeed, if we remove objects in the 3 : 2 , 5 : 3 , 7 : 4 , and 2 : 1 

mean-motion resonances, and objects which are identi-fied as being within the g + s − g8 − s8 resonance from both catalogs, we find that the improvement is more ex-aggerated for SBDynT than for the AstDys catalog. In addition, SBDynT’s integration for 150 Myr rather than 100 Myr has the added impact of allowing for more po-tential migration for the resonant TNO’s; this causes some objects which were initially stable within a reso-nance to become ejected near the end of the simulation, 23 10 2 10 1 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3  

> Distance Metric Indicator dmet (m/s)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> CDF( dmet )
> TNO Distance Metric Uncertainties
> AstDys
> AstDys - No Resonance
> SBDynT
> SBDynT - No Resonance

Figure 8. Cumulative distribution functions of the distance metric computed from the proper element uncertainties re-ported by the AstDys and SBDynT TNO catalogs. Both distributions only represent the TNOs reported by the Ast-Dys catalog as of December 2024, which consists of 2124 TNOs. An additional line shows the distribution of proper elements for all 5060 known TNOs. Note that the SBDynT CDF becomes more shallow around 10 m/s, which is pri-marily due to higher uncertainties reported by SBDynT for mean-motion resonant objects within the sample. 

producing a larger uncertainty measurement. Therefore, several of the objects in our longer integrations may not have fulfilled the criteria for stability originally used for selection when producing the present-day AstDys cata-log. While this does highlight the differences between SB-DynT’s method versus the OrbFit method of proper el-ement computation, we emphasize that this effect oc-curs for objects which already have more poorly defined proper elements, and the overall uncertainties reported by each method remain close to each other, while also remaining accurate. Thus, SBDynT proper elements achieve mostly similar numerical accuracy as the Orb-Fit code, and could improve if the integration length is handled more precisely in specific cases. 4.3. Chaos Indicator Results 

As discussed in Section 3, the stability indicators pro-vided by SBDynT are diverse in terms of their sensitivity and relation to different types of dynamical evolution. To illustrate this, we compute stability maps for the proper power distribution, ACFI, entropy, and Distance Metric indicators for the Classical belt region of TNO space. This is done by first producing a fine grid of 102,951 individual test particles with ranges and spac-ings in semi-major axis, eccentricity, and inclination as given in Table 1. All of these particles were inserted into simulations at the default SBDynT epoch of JD 

= 2459580 .5 with ω = Ω = M = 0 ◦.

Range ∆xSemi-major axis 40 - 48 AU 0.1 AU Eccentricity 0 - 0.3 0.01 Inclination 0◦ - 40 ◦ 1◦

Table 1. Barycentric osculating ecliptic parameter space sampled by the grid of particles to compute stability maps of the Classical Belt TNOs. 

The best-case sampled grid would additionally include a range of sampled ω, Ω, and M points in our distribu-tion of particles. However, in the interest of memory and efficiency, we limit ourselves to a 3-dimensional sample rather than a full 6-dimensional sample of orbital pa-rameter space. We note that sampling our grid in os-culating ecliptic elements inherently limits the sample of low proper inclination orbits because the the locally forced plane of the Classical belt is offset from the eclip-tic plane by ≈ 1.7◦; in other words, this grid inherently undersamples objects with proper inclinations near 0◦.However, our grid is sufficient to demonstrate the broad nature of the chaos in these regions; a more detailed analysis which will account for the offset of the invari-able plane will be approached in a future paper. We integrate the grid of particles for the default 150 million years with SBDynT and save outputs every 50,000 years; this is more coarse than the default set-ting, but is done for disk space and memory purposes. While setting a lower time resolution does affect how well we sample shorter-term secular dynamics for the particles, the stability indicators we will showcase with this grid are more sensitive to secular effects, and should still respond well to coarser time-arrays. The final re-sult of the integrations produced 42 Gb simulated data in our REBOUND binary files and required approxi-mately 5000 CPU-hours to integrate, parallelized across 81 individual AMD EPYC 7763 2.45 GHz processors. The associated stability indicators for each particle were then computed much more quickly. Computing the distance metric for every particle took the longest time, as this requires first computing the proper elements for every particle with the same hardware; it took ≈ 250 

CPU-hours, averaging 9 CPU-seconds per particle. The rest of the stability indicators can be computed quickly enough that they were produced locally from a personal laptop on a single Intel Core Ultra 9 185H 2.30 GHz pro-cessor. The fastest indicator to compute was the entropy indicator, which took less than a minute to compute for the entire grid. Computing the ACFI indicator took 12 minutes, and the power concentration indicator took 135 minutes. Because this grid of particles is distributed through-out 3 dimensions, we display the stability indicators in 24 2-dimensional grids in Figures 9 and 10. The color of each point in the grid represents the median of the sta-bility indicator along the orbital element from Table 1 not represented on the x- or y-axes. These chaos maps thus only indicate a relative measure of the instability of the Classical belt TNOs in each of the two dimensions represented in the Figures; we will further explore the full 3-dimensional impact space of this region in a future paper (D. Spencer et al. in prep). The first 3 indicators each have a range of possible values from 0–1, where a value of 1 indicates stability and 0 indicates instability. In contrast, the value of the distance metric stability indicator is not bounded and large values indicate instability. For visual consistency between colors indicative of unstable vs. stable regions, we have inverted the color-map for the distance metric in Figures 9 and 10. We also note that we do not restrict the color-map range for the stability indicators to match identically between the figures or panels because these chaos maps are meant to display the relative differences in the stability of the Classical belt. There are some obvious visual features in Figures 9 and 10 that highlight the differences between the sta-bility indicators. For example, each indicator suggests higher chaos for orbits with perihelion values q ≤ 38 

AU in Figure 9. Easily noticeable is the black region for ACFI for orbits with q ≲ 34 , where black indicates a median value of ACF I ≲ 0. The reason for this is related to the definition of ACFI, which effectively de-scribes how correlated the early orbital evolution of a particle is to later orbital evolution nearer to the end of the simulation. Not surprisingly, we find that ob-jects with initial conditions above this value of q are scattered within the first several outputs of the simu-lation archive, typically resulting in either an ejection or a collision with the Sun. If the particle is not re-moved from the simulation (because the ejection does not trigger the removal protocol within rebound ) the early simulation and the late simulation orbital elements are effectively identical, causing the reported ACFI in-dicator to appear artificially low. Cases also exist where the object remains bound to the Sun, but is scattered so regularly by Neptune, that the standard deviation for the semi-major axis is very high; this causes the Pear-son coefficient to be extremely low in both cases, even though chaotic motion is highly present in the orbit. To account for scattering orbits, we have SBDynT report an ACF I = −1 for objects where at any point in the simulation a ≤ 0, a > 10 6 AU, and/or σa > 5AU. Or-bits which satisfy this criteria are so present for orbits with q ≤ 34 AU, that the median value becomes neg-ative, which we dictate with a separate color. Perhaps even more surprising is a small region of stability be-tween 46 < a < 47 .5 AU and 0.22 < e < 0.28 . We find that orbits in this region still experience scattering, but are distant enough from Neptune that the evolution in 

a rarely exceeds a ≥ 1 AU over the full 150 Myr inte-gration. As such, ACFI reports these objects as more stable. Figures 9 and 10 also show obvious correlations be-tween the locations of major mean motion resonances and higher chaos. However, the indicators differ in terms of the reported strength of chaos in the resonances and the width of the resonance. For example, the ACFI indi-cator reports higher chaos for objects within many of the weaker mean motion resonances at lower eccentricities than the other indicators do. However, for each indi-cator, the width of the resonance generally follows the same shape for each indicator, with larger eccentricities and lower inclinations corresponding to a larger width of the resonance. Another notable feature is a line of higher-chaos ob-jects at e = 0 for the Power and Distance Metric indi-cators in Figure 9. This is an artifact of collapsing our 3-dimensional grid into a 2-dimensional map and having defined our grid in osculating elements reflecting two pri-mary dynamical effects. First, because the vertical com-ponent of the angular momentum, Lz = cos (I)∗√1 − e2,is conserved, an object with an e ≈ 0 and a large inclina-tion can experience vZLK oscillations where eccentricity and inclination are exchanged. This non-linear secular effect causes the eccentricity to grow and the inclination to shrink, contributing to larger uncertainties being re-ported in the proper elements for these objects and thus larger distant metrics. Second, an object with a proper eccentricity very close to 0 will have orbital evolution that is primarily dominated by the forced terms; this is related to the fact that a circular orbit has no ap-sides, and therefore no true apsidal precession. Any ob-served apsidal precession must therefore be forced. As the power distribution indicator and the distance met-ric indicator both rely on the strength of the proper motion relative to the forced terms within the power spectra, e ≈ 0 objects thus report higher chaos for these indicators. Many more features stand out in the chaos maps, in-cluding known regions of instability, such as the low-inclination region below 42 AU corresponding to the 

ν18 : s − s8 ≈ 0 secular resonance. It is clear from these chaos maps that each stability in-dicator highlights distinct facets of dynamical evolution, from resonant interactions to long-term diffusion and scattering events. The variety of these indicators under-scores that they are not standalone measures, but rather 25 0.00 

0.05 

0.10 

0.15 

0.20 

0.25 

0.30 

40 42 44 46 48 

0.00 

0.05 

0.10 

0.15 

0.20 

0.25 

0.30 

40 42 44 46 48 

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 

# Power Distribution 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 

# ACFI 

0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 

# Entropy 10 1 10 2 10 3

# Distance Metric 

> Eccentricity

# Semi-major Axis (AU) 

# Semi-Major Axis - Eccentricity Chaos Grids 

Figure 9. Stability indicators computed across a grid of particles as a function of semi-major axis and eccentricity. The color of each point gives the median value of the indicator across all inclinations for the particles in each a-e bin. Colorbars are scaled so that yellow/brighter colors indicating choas/instability with bluer/darker colors indicating regularity/stability. Scattered objects have unusual ACFI values and are colored black. 26 40 42 44 46 48 

0

5

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

## Power Concentration 

40 42 44 46 48 

0

5

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

## ACFI 

40 42 44 46 48 

0

5

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

## Entropy 

40 42 44 46 48 

0

5

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

## HCM 

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 

# Power Distribution 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 

# ACFI 

0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 

# Entropy 10 0 10 1 10 2

# Distance Metric 

> Inclination ( )

# Semi-major Axis (AU) 

# Semi-Major Axis - Inclination Chaos Grids 

Figure 10. Stability indicators computed across a grid of particles as a function of semi-major axis and inclination. The color of each point gives the median value of the indicator across all eccentricities for the particles in each a-I bin. Colorbars are scaled slightly differently that in Figure 9, but with the same sense (brighter is more chaotic). 27 complementary tools that reveal elements of orbital be-havior. It falls to the user to interpret these indicators thoughtfully, recognizing the specific insights each offers while being mindful of their limitations. This can lead to better understanding of the system’s stability, poten-tial chaotic behavior, and evolution over time, allowing for a more comprehensive interpretation of complex dy-namical systems.  

> 5.

COMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY AND PERFORMANCE SBDynT’s development is partially in preparation for the incoming flux of newly discovered objects expected from LSST. LSST is projected to discover ∼40,000 TNOs and nearly 5 million new asteroids ( LSST Sci-ence Collaboration et al. 2009; J. A. Kurlander et al. 2025), with the majority of discoveries expected to hap-pen within the first two years of operation. S. Eggl et al. (2019) reports that the number of main belt asteroid discoveries per night could be up to 100,000, with an average of 2,000 per night. Because new observations constantly improve the known orbit of an object, many objects will be dynamically investigated multiple times (e.g., at the times of LSST Data Releases). Thus it is useful to provide an estimate here of the computa-tional time required to run SBDynT on the entire LSST catalog. The time estimates for integration and proper element computation discussed here are computed from integrations performed on cores contained in the mary-lou12 cluster, which is the largest cluster on the BYU Mary Lou Fulton Supercomputer 10 . The marylou12 cluster is composed entirely of AMD EPYC 7763 2.45 GHz cores, with 128 cores per node. As the expected number of asteroids exceeds the ex-pected TNO discoveries by ≈ 125 ×, computing proper elements and stability indicators for the asteroids will require the most computation time. As described in Section 2, to produce proper elements for an individual asteroid, the user must run a rebound simulation of the asteroid’s orbit over 10 Myr, which takes about 20 min-utes per asteroid; the calculation of the proper elements from the completed simulation itself takes ≈ 3 seconds per asteroid. Calculating stability indicators is similarly quick. For the RMS indicator, producing a 1 Myr inte-gration of 10 clones takes about 2 minutes per asteroid. The other indicators can be computed from the default SBDynT integration used to compute the proper ele-ments for the small body. As discussed in Section 4.3, the time to compute the stability indicators is quite fast,  

> 10 https://rc.byu.edu/documentation/resources

with the time required for computation of the proper el-ement far exceeding any of the other indicators. If LSST discovers 2 million asteroids in the first year, we estimate that it would take on the order of 700,000 CPU hours to dynamically analyze the entire catalog with SBDynT. By allocating 10,000 processors to the task, this could be shortened to a 3 day calculation for all SSSBs. While not a small amount of CPU time, it is a very feasible task to run such an analysis annually (e.g. at each LSST data release). We are also exploring methods for propagating uncertainties as orbit fits im-prove that might allow for more efficient choices in how and how often to re-analyze objects. We also note that this estimate of the time required to integrate the full asteroid catalog represents the case where every asteroid is investigated using an individ-ual integration containing the asteroid, the seven giant planets, and the Sun, equating to 9 total particles to-tal in the simulation. This is the default behavior for SBDynT, which we expect will typically be used to in-tegrate singular objects with best-fit orbits and orbital uncertainties defined at a variety of epochs set by ex-ternal orbit databases and thus not controlled by the user. However, a large catalog data release like LSST is likely to present the best-fit orbits (and their uncertain-ties) for discovered asteroids at a common epoch. This means it would be possible to include multiple asteroids (all as massless particles) within a single integration, which could significantly improve the efficiency of inte-grating large samples of asteroids. As the asteroids are always included as test particles, the addition of each asteroid to the simulation scales as O(N ) rather than 

O(N 2) and the more computationally expensive prop-agation of the massive planets can be done just once per large group of asteroids rather than being repeated for each asteroid. This implies that the improvement to efficiency of including multiple asteroids in a simula-tion drops off at a number of asteroids approximately equal to the square of the number of active objects in the simulation. As the asteroid runs include 7 planets and the Sun, it seems reasonable that including up to 50 asteroids in an integration could increase efficiency while balancing the amount of real-time required to run the analysis for all objects. This exact process was used to improve the efficiency of integrating the grid of particles demonstrated in Sec-tion 4.3. While a typical TNO integration can take up-wards of 15 minutes per particle, merging all of the par-ticles for a single semi-major axis bin into a single re-bound integration reduced the time to run to ≈ 3 min-utes per particle. Careful implementation of SBDynT to 28 include many asteroids in a single integration can signif-icantly decrease the required CPU-time to dynamically analyze many objects at once. We performed a brief test of the improvement to CPU efficiency by including multiple objects in a single in-tegration; this is done by simply integrating a single objects and a varying number of clones. We find that the improvement to the efficiency drops off after includ-ing more than 200 asteroids in a single integration. At this point, the improvement to total CPU-time is on the order of ≈ 95% , or in other words, the efficiency is improved by a factor of 20. This brief estimate would in-dicate that the total CPU-time of integrating 2 million asteroids with a common best-fit orbital epoch would take ≈ 35 , 000 CPU-hours, which could be reasonably done in less than a day on a high-performance computer. We reiterate that as SBDynT is built using the RE-BOUND integrator, many options beyond the default settings exist for the user which may allow the user to improve speed or memory. SBDynT’s default settings are meant to capture the most accurate orbital simu-lations, but reasonable modifications, such as choice of integrator or integration timestep, may still produce rea-sonable results. We note that SBDynT is also well-suited for applica-tion to simulated datasets, which are often larger than observational datasets but equally critical for exploring theoretical scenarios and testing dynamical hypotheses. Simulated data allows for controlled experiments on the evolution of orbital systems, providing insights into pro-cesses that may be difficult to observe directly. By leveraging simulated data, researchers can investigate the long-term behavior of hypothetical or poorly con-strained systems, test the impact of specific perturba-tions, and explore the dynamics of objects beyond the current observational limits, whether due to size, dis-tance, or reflectivity.  

> 6.

CONCLUSIONS We describe how SBDynT computes synthetic proper elements for asteroids and TNOs and compare our re-sults with published catalogs. We find that the proper elements calculated by SBDynT are comparable to those provided in previous catalogs, confirming the reliabil-ity of the code for dynamical studies. In addition, the level of precision for the proper element calculation has been confirmed to be sufficient for the process of aster-oid family finding and age estimates, which are some of the primary uses of proper orbital elements for solar system small bodies. We also show that SBDynT of-fers sufficient efficiency and computational tractability for analyzing future surveys that will discover millions of new asteroids and tens of thousands of new TNOs. We also describe SBDynT’s calculation of stability indicators for chaotic orbital evolution. We provide a proof-of-concept use of these indicators that highlights how different indicators flag different kinds of chaotic orbital behavior. The stability indicators that are sup-ported by SBDynT provide the dynamicist with a wide range of options for identifying chaos and divergent or-bital motion. Looking ahead, SBDynT is well-positioned as a valu-able community tool for dynamical studies of small bod-ies, offering a framework that can be quickly applied to new discoveries as they are made. Ultimately, our goal is to utilize SBDynT to dynamically analyze the LSST cat-alog of small body discoveries, enabling automated dy-namical characterization of newly detected objects with sufficiently long observational arcs. As the code contin-ues to evolve, contributions from the broader community will be essential in refining its capabilities and ensuring its long-term impact on planetary dynamics research. 

Acknowledgements: This work was supported by NASA grant 80NSSC23K0886 (PDART). DS had ad-ditional support from NASA grant 80NSSC23K1374 (FINESST). KV acknowledges additional support from NASA grants 80NSSC23K0680 and 80NSSC23K1169. We thank Josh Bushman for his help producing agraphic design logo for the SBDynT code software, in-cluded on the title page of this paper. We also would like to thank our referee for the excellent comments which helped us to clarify and better explain some nuances of SBDynT’s code and numerical accuracy. 

# Facilities: ADS, BYU Office of Research Comput-ing, MPC, JPL Horizons 

# Software: rebound (H. Rein & S. F. Liu 2012), numpy (C. R. Harris et al. 2020), SBDynT (K. Volk & D. Spencer 2026), matplotlib (J. D. Hunter 2007), scipy (E. Jones et al. 2001) 29 REFERENCES 

Arsenault, J. L., Ford, K. C., & Koskela, P. E. 1970, AIAA Journal, 8, 4, doi: 10.2514/3.5597 Batygin, K., & Laughlin, G. 2008, ApJ, 683, 1207, doi: 10.1086/589232 Bernstein, G. M., Najafi, N., & Gomes, D. C. H. 2025, PSJ, 6, 162, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ade3de Bolin, B. T., Delbo, M., Morbidelli, A., & Walsh, K. J. 2017, Icarus, 282, 290, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2016.09.029 Bottke, Jr., W. F., Vokrouhlický, D., Rubincam, D. P., & Nesvorný, D. 2006, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 34, 157, doi: 10.1146/annurev.earth.34.031405.125154 Brouwer, D., & van Woerkom, A. J. J. 1950, Astronomical papers prepared for the use of the American ephemeris and nautical almanac, 13, 81 Brown, G., & Rein, H. 2020, Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 4, 221, doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/abd103 Carruba, V., Aljbaae, S., Domingos, R. C., Huaman, M., & Barletta, W. 2021, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 133, 38, doi: 10.1007/s10569-021-10036-6 Carruba, V., Domingos, R. C., Huaman, M. E., Santos, C. R. d., & Souami, D. 2014, MNRAS, 437, 2279, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt2040 Carruba, V., Nesvorný, D., Aljbaae, S., Domingos, R. C., & Huaman, M. 2016, MNRAS, 458, 3731, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw533 Carruba, V., Vokrouhlický, D., & Novaković, B. 2018, Planet. Space Sci., 157, 72, doi: 10.1016/j.pss.2018.03.009 Chambers, J. E. 1999, MNRAS, 304, 793, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.1999.02379.x Eggl, S., Jones, L., & Jurić, M. 2019, LSST Asteroid Discovery Rates, LSST Data Management Reports. https://dmtn-109.lsst.io Fenucci, M., Gronchi, G. F., & Saillenfest, M. 2022, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 134, 23, doi: 10.1007/s10569-022-10078-4 Ferrone, S., Delbo, M., Avdellidou, C., et al. 2023, A&A, 676, A5, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202245594 Fuentes-Muñoz, O., Farnocchia, D., Giorgini, J. D., & Park, R. S. 2025, AJ, 170, 353, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ae0cc9 Giorgini, J. D., Yeomans, D. K., Chamberlin, A. B., et al. 1996, in AAS/Division for Planetary Sciences Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 28, AAS/Division for Planetary Sciences Meeting Abstracts #28, 25.04 Gronchi, G. F., & Milani, A. 2001, Icarus, 152, 58, doi: 10.1006/icar.2001.6610 Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al. 2020, Nature, 585, 357, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2 Hayes, W. B. 2007, Nature Physics, 3, 689, doi: 10.1038/nphys728 Hirayama, K. 1918, AJ, 31, 185, doi: 10.1086/104299 Holman, M. J., Akmal, A., Farnocchia, D., et al. 2023, PSJ, 4, 69, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/acc9a9 Hsieh, H. H., Bannister, M. T., Bolin, B. T., et al. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1906.11346, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1906.11346 Huang, Y., Gladman, B., & Volk, K. 2022, ApJS, 259, 54, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac559a Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science & Engineering, 9, 90–95, doi: 10.1109/mcse.2007.55 Ito, T., & Malhotra, R. 2025, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 137, 19, doi: 10.1007/s10569-025-10249-z Jones, E., Oliphant, T., Peterson, P., et al. 2001, SciPy: Open source scientific tools for Python, http://www.scipy.org/ JPL. 2024, Small Body Databse Query„ https://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/tools/sbdb_query.html Jet Propulsion Laboratories Knežević, Z., & Milani, A. 2000, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 78, 17, doi: 10.1023/A:1011187405509 Knežević, Z., & Milani, A. 2003, A&A, 403, 1165, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20030475 Knežević, Z., & Milani, A. 2019, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 131, 27, doi: 10.1007/s10569-019-9906-4 Knezevic, Z., Tsiganis, K., & Varvoglis, H. 2006, Publications de l’Observatoire Astronomique de Beograd, 80, 161 Kurlander, J. A., Bernardinelli, P. H., Schwamb, M. E., et al. 2025, AJ, 170, 99, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/add685 Levison, H. F., & Duncan, M. J. 1994, Icarus, 108, 18, doi: 10.1006/icar.1994.1039 LSST Science Collaboration, Abell, P. A., Allison, J., et al. 2009, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:0912.0201, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.0912.0201 Marcus, R. A., Ragozzine, D., Murray-Clay, R. A., & Holman, M. J. 2011, ApJ, 733, 40, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/733/1/40 Milani, A., Cellino, A., Knežević, Z., et al. 2014, Icarus, 239, 46, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2014.05.039 Milani, A., & Knežević , Z. 1998, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 71, 55, doi: 10.1023/A:1008315029975 Milani, A., & Knezevic, Z. 1992, Icarus, 98, 211, doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(92)90091-K 30 

Milani, A., & Knezevic, Z. 1994, Icarus, 107, 219, doi: 10.1006/icar.1994.1020 Milani, A., & Nobili, A. M. 1992, Nature, 357, 569, doi: 10.1038/357569a0 Milani, A., Nobili, A. M., & Carpino, M. 1987, A&A, 172, 265 Morbidelli, A. 1993, Icarus, 105, 48, doi: 10.1006/icar.1993.1110 Murray, C. D., & Dermott, S. F. 1999, Solar System Dynamics (Cambridge University Press), doi: 10.1017/CBO9781139174817 Nesvorný, D., Brož, M., & Carruba, V. 2015, in Asteroids IV, ed. P. Michel, F. E. DeMeo, & W. F. Bottke (University of Arizona Press), 297–321, doi: 10.2458/azu_uapress_9780816532131-ch016 Nesvorný, D., Enke, B. L., Bottke, W. F., et al. 2006, Icarus, 183, 296, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2006.03.008 Nesvorný, D., Roig, F., Vokrouhlický, D., & Brož, M. 2024, ApJS, 274, 25, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ad675c Nesvorný, D., Vokrouhlický, D., Brož, M., & Roig, F. V. 2026, Icarus, 443, 116768, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2025.116768 Novaković, B., Vokrouhlický, D., Spoto, F., & Nesvorný, D. 2022, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 134, 34, doi: 10.1007/s10569-022-10091-7 Núñez, J. A., Cincotta, P. M., & Wachlin, F. C. 1996, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 64, 43, doi: 10.1007/BF00051604 O’Brien, D. P., Morbidelli, A., & Bottke, W. F. 2007, Icarus, 191, 434, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2007.05.005 Park, R. S., Folkner, W. M., Williams, J. G., & Boggs, D. H. 2021, AJ, 161, 105, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abd414 Rein, H., & Liu, S. F. 2012, A&A, 537, A128, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201118085 Rein, H., & Spiegel, D. S. 2015, MNRAS, 446, 1424, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu2164 Rein, H., & Tamayo, D. 2015, MNRAS, 452, 376, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv1257 Rein, H., & Tamayo, D. 2016, MNRAS, 459, 2275, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw644 Rein, H., & Tamayo, D. 2017, MNRAS, 467, 2377, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx232 Shannon, C. E., & Weaver, W. 1949a, The mathematical theory of communication (Bell System Technical Journal) Shannon, C. E., & Weaver, W. 1949b, The mathematical theory of communication (The Bell System Technical Journa) Spencer, D., Ragozzine, D., Volk, K., & Malhotra, R. in prep, in prep Spencer, D., Volk, K., Ragozzine, D., & Malhotra, R. 2024, in AAS/Division of Dynamical Astronomy Meeting, Vol. 55, AAS/Division of Dynamical Astronomy Meeting, 405.28 Vokrouhlický, D., Brož, M., Bottke, W. F., Nesvorný, D., & Morbidelli, A. 2006, Icarus, 182, 118, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2005.12.010 Volk, K., & Malhotra, R. 2025, in Machine Learning for Small Bodies in the Solar System. Edited by V. Carruba, ed. V. Carruba, E. Smirnov, & D. Oszkiewicz (Elsevier), 173–207, doi: 10.1016/B978-0-44-324770-5.00012-X Volk, K., Malhotra, R., Spencer, D., & Ragozzine, D. 2025, in AAS/Division of Dynamical Astronomy Meeting, Vol. 56, AAS/Division of Dynamical Astronomy Meeting, 402.03 Volk, K., & Spencer, D. 2026, small-body-dynamics/SBDynT: Small Body Dynamics Tool (SBDynT), v1.0.0 Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.19138321 Volk, K., Spencer, D., Malhotra, R., & Ragozzine, D. 2024, in AAS/Division for Planetary Sciences Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 56, 56th Annual Meeting of the Division for Planetary Sciences, 205.07 Šidlichovský, M., & Nesvorný, D. 1996, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 65, 137, doi: 10.1007/BF00048443 Wisdom, J., & Holman, M. 1991, AJ, 102, 1528, doi: 10.1086/115978 Zappala, V., Cellino, A., Farinella, P., & Knezevic, Z. 1990, AJ, 100, 2030, doi: 10.1086/115658 31  

> A.

DOMINANT FREQUENCY IDENTIFICATION The process of identifying the dominant frequencies in the Fourier transform of the e and I vectors for both the planets and the small body is an important step to properly computing the proper elements of a small body. As discussed in Section 2.3, this is more complex than just finding the peak frequency in the Fourier spectrum. Due to spectral leakage, signals in the Fourier transform of the time array are spread out among several bins. This can cause dominant short-period frequencies to spread out and appear less prominent than longer-period frequencies in the signal. We instead compute the discrete sum of the power for each region of the signal to identify the dominant frequency, while also accounting for the influence of the other planets in the signal. SBDynT calculates the cumulative sum of the signal’s power separately for both the positive and negative region of frequency space in the signal. Then the local sum of power for each frequency can be computed by finding the difference in the cumulative sum over a window of frequencies, and saved at every point. This is equivalent to discretizing the power in each region using a binning method, but is faster because the sums only have to be computed once. The peak value in this discretized power spectrum is then tentatively identified as the dominant frequency. For the planets, SBDynT performs this process in an order relative to their individual gravitational influence on each other and the rest of the Solar System. Before beginning the above search for the planetary dominant frequency, we first perform a quick filter of all of the previously identified planet frequencies by simply dividing the region in the power spectrum near that frequency by a value of 500; this value was selected through empirical testing to most accurately account for the influence of the planet’s on each other. For example, if SBDynT begins searching for the 

g8 frequency in Neptune’s Fourier spectrum, it first filters out the g5, g6, and g7 frequencies associated with Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus. Once each of the gi and si frequencies are identified in this way, the same procedure is then applied to the small body to find its dominant g and s frequencies. The initial filter of the planetary frequencies is less severe, however, because the dominant frequency for a small-body in or near a secular resonance could be equal to one of the planetary frequencies, indicating presence within the secular resonance. We empirically find that a filter dividing the power spectrum near the g5, g6, and s6 frequencies by a value of 50 and all other planets by a value of 20 yields sufficiently accurate initial g and s identifications. In cases where the small body’s peak frequency is in or near a resonance with a planet frequency, this method often skews the determined dominant frequency somewhat in the direction of that nearby planetary resonance. To account for this, the final step involves taking a weighted mean of the nearby frequencies using their associated power as the weighting factor. This final step ensures that the dominant g or s frequency identified by SBDynT is associated with a local peak value in the signal. There are also some cases where spectral leakage produces a plateau of sorts; in these cases, the peak frequency is located at the center of the flat plateau, rather than at a peak value. We have confirmed that these corrections do successfully find g and s frequencies for small bodies that agree more closely with the published catalogs. Examples of the planetary secular frequencies found by SBDynT for the major planets and an example asteroid are shown in Figures 11 and 12. Table 2 lists the specific values identified in our default integrations compared to prior works. Note that SBDynT’s method of determining peak frequencies identifies the correct dominant signal even when bodies are strongly affected by perturbing planets. Uranus’ e signal is a good example; the peak frequency in the Fourier transform initially corresponds to Jupiter’s g5; first determining and then filtering out Jupiter and Saturn’s signals allows the correct g7 to instead be identified. 32 10 10 

10 8

10 6

10 4

10 2

10 0

Jupiter 

g5 = 4.276"/yr 

Saturn 

g6 = 28.249"/yr 

10 10 

10 8

10 6

10 4

10 2

10 0

Uranus 

g7 = 3.107"/yr 

Neptune 

g8 = 0.651"/yr 

10 10 

10 8

10 6

10 4

10 2

10 0

Venus 

g2 = 7.161"/yr 

Earth 

g3 = 17.579"/yr 

10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7

10 10 

10 8

10 6

10 4

10 2

10 0

Mars 

g4 = 17.140"/yr 

10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7

Asteroid (46) Proserpina 

Jupiter 

Saturn 

Uranus 

Neptune 

Venus 

Earth 

Mars 

Eccentricity Power Spectra 

Period (yrs) 

> Normalized Power

Figure 11. The planetary Fourier transformed power spectrum in e, and the identified peak secular frequencies identified by SBDynT from the power spectra. All of the frequencies are also shown for an asteroid signal. 33 10 10 

10 8

10 6

10 4

10 2

10 0

Jupiter 

No s frequency 

Saturn 

s6 = 26.329"/yr 

10 10 

10 8

10 6

10 4

10 2

10 0

Uranus 

s7 = 2.981"/yr 

Neptune 

s8 = 0.667"/yr 

10 10 

10 8

10 6

10 4

10 2

10 0

Venus 

s2 = 6.199"/yr 

Earth 

s3 = 18.552"/yr 

10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7

10 10 

10 8

10 6

10 4

10 2

10 0

Mars 

s4 = 17.714"/yr 

10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7

Asteroid (46) Proserpina 

Saturn 

Uranus 

Neptune 

Venus 

Earth 

Mars 

Inclination Power Spectra 

Period (yrs) 

> Normalized Power

Figure 12. The planetary Fourier transformed power spectrum in I, and the identified peak secular frequencies identified by SBDynT from the power spectra. All of the frequencies are also shown for an asteroid signal. The x-axis has been modified to represent the negative frequencies. 34 

gi BvW 1950 SBDynT si BvW 1950 SBDynT Venus g2 7.436 "/yr 7.146 "/yr s2 -6.570 "/yr -6.214 "/yr Earth g3 17.331 "/yr 17.637 "/yr s3 -18.746 "/yr -18.735 "/yr Mars g4 18.004 "/yr 16.999 "/yr s4 -17.636 "/yr -17.752 "/yr 

gi MK 1994 SBDynT si MK 1994 SBDynT Jupiter g5 4.245 "/yr 4.277 "/yr s5 ... ... Saturn g6 28.236 "/yr 28.253 "/yr s6 -26.314 "/yr -26.338 "/yr Uranus g7 3.087 "/yr 3.110 "/yr s7 -2.993 "/yr -2.981 "/yr Neptune g8 0.672 "/yr 0.648 "/yr s8 -0.692 "/yr -0.656 "/yr 

Table 2. Secular frequencies of the terrestrial planets determined by analytical theory in (D. Brouwer & A. J. J. van Woerkom 1950, BvW 1950), and the giant planets synthetic analysis by (A. Milani & Z. Knezevic 1994, MK 1994), as compared to values produced by SBDynT in a 10 Myr asteroid simulation. Most differences are minor, and are a consequence of a difference in frequency resolution. We note that the frequencies for Uranus and Neptune are strongly affected by the length of the integration, with more accurate values being achieved for the TNO simulations, where their impact is much more significant. We demonstrate in Figures 11 and 12 that these frequencies remain close fits to the secular frequencies as contained in the asteroid signal for this shorter-length simulation, which allows filtering to still remain accurate. B. LINEAR AND NON-LINEAR SECULAR FREQUENCIES IN FILTERING Here we describe the linear and non-linear secular frequencies filtered out by SBDynT for each small body, as well as the secular frequencies which are protected for being inherently part of the proper element signal. Linear terms are those which are composed of a single precession frequency for the small body and the matching planetary frequency, (i.e. g − g5, s − s6). Non-linear terms make up effectively all other terms which combine multiple precession frequencies and/or multiple planetary frequencies (i.e., g + g5 − 2g6, s − s6 − g5 + g6, g + s − g8 − s8). Non-linear secular frequencies thus typically originate from higher-order terms in the expansion of the equations of motion for an orbiting body, specifically from the disturbing function, though many of the most significant non-linear terms in the Solar System are often lower-order. One need only look as far as the first three terms of the direct part of the disturbing function to see where several of the terms listed below come from (the second and third zeroth order terms taken from C. D. Murray & S. F. Dermott (1999)): 

(jλ − jλ ′ + ¯ ω′ − ¯ω) ×  ee ′f10 + e3e′f11 + ee ′3f12 + ee ′(s2 + s′2)f13 

 (9) 

(jλ ′ − jλ + Ω ′ − Ω) ×  ss ′f14 + ss ′(e2 + e′2)f15 + ss ′(s2 + s′2)f16 

 (10) where 

s = sin 

 I

2



, s′ = sin 

 I′

2



, D ≡ ddα , α = aa′

f10 = 14

2 + 6 j + 4 j2 − 2αD − α2D2 Aj+1 

f11 = 132 

−6j − 26 j2 − 36 j3 − 16 j4 + 6 jαD + 12 j2αD − 4α2D2 + 7 jα 2D2 + 8 j2α2D2 − 6α3D3 − α4D4 Aj+1 

f12 = 132 

4 + 2 j − 22 j2 − 36 j3 − 16 j4 − 4αD + 22 jαD + 20 j2αD − 22 α2D2 + 7 jα 2D2 + 8 j2α2D2

− 10 α3D3 − α4D4 Aj+1 

f13 = 18

−6jα − 4j2α + 4 α2D + α3D2 (Bj + Bj+2 )

f14 = αB j+1 

f15 = 14

2α − 4j2α + 4 α2D + α3D2 Bj+1 

f16 = 12



−αB j+1 + 3( −α2)Cj + 32 (−α2)Cj+2 

35 There are several non-linear terms in these zeroth order equations, such as ee ′s′2, which would give rise to coupled 

gi + 2 si terms in the orbital expansion, which should be filtered out if present in the orbital motion. Non-linear terms may also exist within just the proper motion of the small body, such as the 2g − 2s term, which is the 5th direct term within the zeroth-order expansion of the disturbing function from C. D. Murray & S. F. Dermott (1999): 

cos( jλ ′ − jλ + 2 ϖ − 2Ω) × e2s2f18 (11) where 

f18 = 116 

12 α − 15 jα + 4 j2α + 8 α2D − 4jα 2D + α3D2 Bj−1

This term implies that while we often treat the eccentricity and inclination evolution as separable at the lowest-order on secular timescales, strong coupling is still present for large enough coefficients of f18 , for small bodies with large e

or I, or for small enough cosine arguments of jλ ′ − jλ + 2 ϖ − 2Ω . The assumption that eccentricity and inclination can remain separable when computing proper elements is only appropriate for small bodies which experience a small 11 term, and becomes an invalid assumption when considering mean motion resonant objects, vZLK objects (where 

2ϖ − 2Ω ≡ ω ≈ 0), or objects which orbit closely to the considered perturber, such as is the case for Centaurs in the outer Solar System. In their computation of synthetic proper elements, Z. Knežević & A. Milani (2000) perform filtering for up to 4th-order secular frequency terms, which are generally weak, but can become significant for objects that have high eccentricities or inclinations, or are inside or very near specific non-linear secular frequencies. We follow their approach of considering frequencies up to 4th-order for our filtering. Table 3 lists the non-linear secular frequency combinations we filter from the eccentricities of small bodies; we also list example specific values for these frequencies from one of our integrations. Similarly, Table 4 lists the non-linear frequency combinations filtered from the inclinations of small bodies and Table 5 lists frequencies filtered from both eccentricity and inclination. We note that the secular frequencies for planets contained in the simulation are also always targeted for removal, thus accounting for all of the linear secular terms from the planets. Only the proper frequency secular terms for the small body are protected during filtering. While many objects may display signal among the higher order n × g, s frequencies, these are generally forced terms that appear due to commensurability with planetary secular terms, and should be filtered out to properly retrieve the proper motion.                                                                                 

> Secular Frequency Terms Frequency (1/yr) "/yr Period (yrs)
> 2g6−g54.030 ∗10 −552.223 24816
> 2g5−g6−1.520 ∗10 −5-19.699 -65788
> 2g7−g6−1.700 ∗10 −5-22.032 -58822
> 2g6−g74.120 ∗10 −553.395 24271
> 3g6−2g55.880 ∗10 −576.204 17006
> g6−g5+g72.089 ∗10 −527.086 47847
> g6+g5−g72.270 ∗10 −529.419 44052
> 2g6−g5+s6−s72.230 ∗10 −528.896 44850
> g5+s7−s62.130 ∗10 −527.610 46940
> Table 3. Non-linear secular frequencies that are specifically targeted for removal during filtering of the eccentricity vector, as these frequencies take the form of g−fi. Specific frequency values were produced from a 10 Myr simulation of an asteroid with outputs every 500 years; some frequencies may diverge those determined from analytical theory.

36 

Secular Frequency Terms Frequency (1/yr) "/yr Period (yrs) 

s6 + s7 −2.260 ∗ 10 −5 -29.295 -44,203 

s6 + s8 −2.082 ∗ 10 −5 -26.970 -48,053 

s7 + s8 −2.810 ∗ 10 −6 -3.637 -356,370 

2s6 − s7 −3.831 ∗ 10 −5 -49.647 -26,104 

2s6 − s8 −4.010 ∗ 10 −5 -51.972 -24,936 

2s7 − s6 1.570 ∗ 10 −5 20.352 63,678 

2s7 − s8 −4.094 ∗ 10 −6 -5.306 -244,263 

2s8 − s7 1.288 ∗ 10 −6 1.669 776,471 

2g5 − s6 2.690 ∗ 10 −5 34.867 37169 

2g5 − s7 8.900 ∗ 10 −5 11.534 112,361 

2g6 − s6 6.390 ∗ 10 −5 82.819 15,648 

2g6 − s7 4.589 ∗ 10 −5 59.486 21,786 

g5 + g6 − s6 4.540 ∗ 10 −5 58.843 22,024 

g5 + g6 − s7 2.740 ∗ 10 −5 35.510 36,496 

g5 − g6 + s6 −3.880 ∗ 10 −5 -50.290 -25,770 

Table 4. Non-linear secular frequencies that are specifically targeted for removal during filtering of the inclination vector, as these frequencies take the form of s − fi. Specific frequency values were produced from a 10 Myr simulation of an asteroid with outputs every 500 years; some frequencies may diverge from analytical theory. Secular Combination Frequency (1/yr) "/yr Period (yrs) 

g6 + s6 1.496 ∗ 10 −6 1.939 668,399 

2g6 + s6 2.330 ∗ 10 −5 30.191 42,925 

3g6 + s6 4.510 ∗ 10 −5 58.444 22,174 

±g7 + s7* ±7.175 ∗ 10 −8 ±0.093 ±13 , 936 , 917 

±g8 + s8* ±1.333 ∗ 10 −8 ±0.017 ±74 , 993 , 665 

g5 + s6 −1.700 ∗ 10 −5 -22.037 58,809 

g5 + s7 9.999 ∗ 10 −7 1.296 1,000,082 

g6 + s7 1.948 ∗ 10 −5 25.272 51,282 

g7 + s8 1.894 ∗ 10 −6 2.454 528,052 

g6 − s6 4.276 × 10 −5 54.567 23,750 

g7 − s7 4.700 ∗ 10 −6 6.091 212,774 

g8 − s8 1.053 × 10 −6 1.365 949,333 

Table 5. Non-linear secular frequencies which are specifically targeted for removal during filtering of both the eccentricity and inclination vectors, as these frequencies take the form of g + s ± fi, or g − s ± fi.These are instead computed from gi and si frequencies as reported by a 150 Myr TNO integration, as the higher resolution is necessary to accurately represent these very long terms. These secular frequencies are generally only relevant for outer Solar System small bodies, so the precision of these frequencies does not significantly affect the computation of asteroid proper elements. Proper Secular Frequency Frequency (1/yr) "/yr Period (yrs) 

g 4.542 × 10 −5 58.866 22,016 

s −3.779 × 10 −5 -48.981 -26,459 

Table 6. Example Proper Secular Frequencies for asteroid (46) Proserpina. This frequencies are respectively protected during filtering of the eccentricity and inclination vectors. 37  

> C.

ADDITIONAL DIAGNOSTIC PROPER ELEMENT CATALOG COMPARISONS Here we further discuss the differences between the computed proper elements among the three catalogs considered in this paper. We also provide additional figures demonstrating SBDynT’s precision. C.1. Precise Uncertainty Computation 

In Section 2.4, we showed the cumulative density function comparing the distance metric computed using the uncertainties from each catalog (Figure 6). SBDynT was shown to mostly outperform the Asteroid Families Portal in published uncertainties. However, they agree for distance metrics below 1 m/s, which require very small uncertainties to achieve (typically on the order of at 10 −5 for a, e, and sin( I)). The CDF presented there was computed using the RMS of all five (overlapping) time windows compared to the proper element computed by averaging the filtered values over the full integration. In Figure 13 we show the same distribution but consider the RMS of the five windows compared the mean of the filtered elements in each window (the filtering is done independently in each window, so the average of the windows is not the same as the average across the entire time-span). The uncertainties in this case are highly improved for the most stable (smallest distance metric) objects, causing SBDynT to report uncertainties similar to the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) catalog instead. 10 2 10 1 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3

## Distance Metric Indicator d (m/s) 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> CDF( d)

# Asteroid Distance Metric Uncertainties 

Nesvorny 2024 

SBDynT 

AFP 2024         

> Figure 13. Cumulative distribution of the distance metric computed by calculating the RMS between the five windows in SBDynT’s integrations, excluding the proper element of the full length integration. Due to differences in frequency resolution between the entire integration length and the length of the windows, an additional amount of power is filtered out of the evector, leading to offsets ranging from 10 −6−10 −7in e. Therefore, the lower end of the CDF shrinks somewhat when including the full-length integration in the root-mean square calculation. Computing the uncertainties in this way produces a nearly identical distance metric CDF to the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) catalog.

A quick investigation of the orbits with the smallest distance metrics indicates that this shift is a feature of our method of computing proper elements and filtering. When performing a Discrete Fourier Transform on a time array, the sampling frequency of the Fourier transform is equal to 1/(dt × N ), where dt is timestep, and N represents the length of the array. In the case of a full SBDynT asteroid simulation, this corresponds to a sampling frequency resolution of 1/(1000 × 10001) ≈ 10 −7. Each window, however, has a sampling frequency resolution twice that value, because the time array is only half as long; the resulting power spectrum has to be distributed twice as strongly in each bin of the Fourier transform. The filtering method accounts for this change, but we found that the smoothing process, 38 which redistributes and removes some power from the vector, filters out approximately 1 extra bins-worth of power, perhaps due to the fact that the window is 5001 bins shorter, not 5000. We have not seen a significant improvement by increasing the length of the windows by one, so we conclude that there is a minor fundamental difference in how the Discrete Fourier transform handles power for like-arrays. In the end, this causes the windows to consistently have a mean value that is less than the proper element for the full integration window; the difference is typically on the order of 10 −6. Because of this, there is no visible effect on the uncertainties reported for most objects. For objects with highly stable orbits, however, this causes the reported proper element uncertainties we compute to rarely fall below values of 10 −6; there is effectively somewhat of an uncertainty “floor” in SBDynT. As can be seen in Figure 6, the reported uncertainties even at this floor match the distribution of uncertainties reported by the Asteroid Families Portal, indicating that the uncertainties are still sufficiently small. In addition, the number of objects with uncertainties sufficient for family finding remains unchanged, because the uncertainty floor still produces relative velocities for the uncertainties near values of 0.1-1 m/s using the distance metric presented by V. Zappala et al. (1990). For this reason, we see no reason to further improve the uncertainties. However, the stability of our filtering method remains effective, and if only the comparison between like-sized windows is considered, can produce uncertainties that are comparable to the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) catalog. C.2. Additional Filtering for the Eccentricity and Inclination Time Arrays 

Mentioned in Section-2.3, many non-linear frequencies present within the eccentricity and inclination evolution can escape filtering of the ⇀

e and ⇀

I vectors. This is primarily due to phase modulation of those frequencies which occurs during the calculation of the vectors, themselves, as the non-linear frequencies are linear combinations of the proper frequency and the planetary secular frequencies which are present within the small body orbit. The is illustrated in the following Figures, which use TNO’s (15760) Albion and 2019 QQ110. We emphasize that while the most dominant non-linear frequency present in the eccentricity and inclination evolution for both objects is near the g + s − g8 − s8, the Arnold web of secular resonances among the TNOs is dense, and so there are many resonances contributing to the overall evolution for these objects. For example, we see that before any filtering occurs, Albion contains strong signals in eccentricity at g − g8, 2g − 2s, and g + s − g8 − s8, and in inclination at s, s8, 2s − s8,

2g − 2s, and g + s − g8 − s8. There are also a number of integer multiples of these resonant frequencies, which spread from out the non-linear frequency in a sinc function as expected, such as the 2g − 2g8 frequency in eccentricity. In the case of 2019 QQ110, there are many of the same signals present in the eccentricity, with the addition of 

g − 2g7. In addition, the limited length and resolution of the integration causes the reported g + s − g8 − s8 frequency to not correspond directly with the longest-period term; instead the closest real term is reported as a integer multiple of g + s − g8 − s8.In both cases, the non-linear resonance causes the relevant long-period terms to be modulated in the full vector form into the proper g, s and planetary g8, s 8 frequencies themselves. As the proper g, s frequencies are protected during the initial filter on the ⇀

e, ⇀

I vectors, the signals corresponding to these long-period terms are protected. Mentioned previously, SBDynT applies an additional filter to the filtered e, I arrays themselves which still contain these non-linear signals. While this has no effect on the final reported proper elements themselves, this does have an impact on the reported uncertainties corresponding to the proper elements for these near-secular resonant objects. C.3. Short-Period Filtering Residuals 

As discussed in Section 2.3, filtering out the short-period frequencies for a small body typically has negligible effects on the final reported proper elements. However, there are cases near mean-motion resonances where short-period terms are amplified both by the small body’s proximity to the resonance and times when they are amplified by the proximity of the short-period terms to the Nyquist frequency of SBDynT’s simulation output sampling. We found specific cases, such as low-eccentricity outer belt asteroids near the 1:2 mean-motion resonance with Jupiter, where short-period terms contribute as much as 1-2% of the total power of the entire signal and our filtering reduces the proper eccentricity by ∼ 1% compared to catalogs that don’t filter short-period terms. Figure 16 shows an example for Asteroid (1175) Margo, which has an orbit with a semi-major axis of 3.211 AU, very close to the 1:2 resonance. The proximity to the 1:2 mean motion resonance with Jupiter causes a large short-period term to appear in the power spectra for Asteroid (1175) Margo; in fact, this term is the second largest contributor to the total signal after the dominant, proper term, surpassing even the power added by Jupiter’s secular frequency. This term is therefore the 39 0.050         

> 0.060
> 0.070
> 0.080
> 0.090
> Ecc
> Unfiltered Array
> Filtered 1 Array
> Filtered Array
> 80 60 40 20 020 40 60 80
> 0.000
> 1.000
> 2.000
> 3.000
> 4.000
> 5.000
> Inc ( )
> Window Elements
> Proper Element

Time (Myr) 

# TNO (15760) Albion 

Figure 14. Power spectra of the eccentricity and inclination for TNO (15760) Albion for the unfiltered elements (black), the elements after a single filter on the e, I vectors (blue), and the elements after the additional filter applied directly to the 

e, sin (I) filtered time arrays (orange). The dominant signals present in the time evolution are primarily contained in non-linear frequencies, as shown by the vertical lines. The initial filter is effective at removing 1st order linear frequencies, but fails to remove higher order signals, especially non-linear signals. An additional filter effectively captures the remaining non-linear terms. Note that signal corresponding most closely with the proper g, s frequencies remains, though the remnant variation is limited. 

largest forced term in the orbital motion of the asteroid, and needs to be filtered to define the proper eccentricity of the asteroid. Figure 17 demonstrates that proper eccentricities calculated with and without filtering out this short-period term will have significant offsets. C.4. TNO Residuals for Mean Element Objects 

As discussed in Section 4.2, the largest source of residuals between AstDys and SBDynT for the TNOs occur primarily among the Cold Classical objects, which are strongly affected by the g + s − g8 − s8 resonance. Here we include two examples of such objects, displaying the residuals in the reported eccentricity and inclination due to long-period variation, and discuss how this resonant interaction can produce small offsets in the comptued proper elements. The first case is shown in Figures 18 for TNO (45802) 2000 PV29; the eccentricity residual between AstDys and SBDynT is large, with ∆eprop ≈ 0.0025 . We find that the reported proper eccentricity from AstDys is actually close to the mean of the unfiltered eccentricity over time, indicating that perhaps the AstDys value avoids filtering out Neptune, or possibly computes the transformation to the locally forced plane in a different way. We also find difference between the AstDys reported proper g frequency and ours, shown in Figure 19; AstDys reports a proper g frequency that is nearer to g8 than to the proper g term reported by SBDynT. SBDynT avoids filtering out the planetary frequencies when they are too close to the small body’s identified proper frequency. It could be that a similar check occurs in the OrbFit code and was triggered because of its identified g for 2000 PV29, causing it to avoid filtering out Neptune and leading to the large residual between SBDynT and AstDys. The method for identifying the dominant frequency can lead to different proper elements if a different g or s frequency is identified for a small body. 40 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8     

> 10 9
> 10 7
> 10 5
> 10 3
> 10 1
> 10 1
> 10 3
> 10 5
> Eccentricity

TNO (15760) Albion Array Spectra            

> gg8
> 2g2g8
> 2g2s
> 2g7
> g+sg8s8
> 10 410 510 610 710 8

Period (yrs)           

> 10 9
> 10 6
> 10 3
> 10 0
> 10 3
> 10 6
> Inclination
> s
> s8
> ss8
> 2ss8
> 2g2s
> g+sg8s8

Figure 15. Power spectra of the eccentricity and inclination for TNO (15760) Albion for the unfiltered elements (black), the elements after a single filter on the e, I vectors (blue), and the elements after the additional filter applied directly to the 

e, sin (I) filtered time arrays (orange). The dominant signals present in the time evolution are primarily contained in non-linear frequencies, as shown by the vertical lines. The initial filter is effective at removing 1st order linear frequencies, but fails to remove higher order signals, especially non-linear signals. An additional filter effectively captures the remaining non-linear terms. Note that signal corresponding most closely with the proper g, s frequencies remains, though the remnant variation is limited. 

A separate example with long-period terms in inclination can be seen in Figure 20, which experiences long-period variation in both inclination and eccentricity. Similar to 2000 PV29, there are minor differences between the reported proper g, s frequencies from SBDynT and AstDys, though the differences are much smaller. However, we mention that SBDynT reports g = −s, while AstDys has a slight separation between the magnitude of the g and s frequencies, likely due to higher spectral resolution. However, it is also interesting that the reported AstDys frequencies are both slightly lower frequency values than SBDynT, and that the values are lower by more than a full frequency bin in both cases. The uncertainties reported by SBDynT are similar to those reported by AstDys indicating that the resonant interactions induced by the long-period terms are mostly handled to the same degree. However, minor differences to the reported proper elements which exceed the computed uncertainties themselves indicate some differences remain in our computation of the proper elements. The last, and perhaps the most significant, factor we find is that the evolution in a produces 44 .35 < a helio < 45 .05 

AU, with a proper aprop = 44 .68 AU. However, AstDys reports an aprop = 44 .21 AU, which lies outside the range of sampled semi-major axes within the simulation. We can confirm that sampling the barycentric semi-major axis only decreases the range of sampled a, so this could be be the cause of the disagreement. The most likely explanation for 41 10 6 10 5 10 4 10 4 10 5 10 6   

> Period (yrs)
> 10 6
> 10 4
> 10 2
> 10 0
> 10 2
> 10 4
> 10 6
> Power Spectrum
> Asteroid (1175) Margo Eccentricity Filtered Power Spectrum
> Unfiltered Power
> Filtered Power
> Filtered Freqs
> Protected Freqs
> Dominant Freq

Figure 16. Unfiltered and filtered eccentricity power spectrum for Asteroid (1175) Margo. With an orbit near the 1:2 mean motion resonance with Jupiter, short period terms from Jupiter that lie below the Nyquist frequency are significant contributors to the total power. In this case, a short-period term is produced near -1800 years; this term is the second largest contributor to the power of the eccentricity vector. The x-axis is limited to ±1 Myr to better display the short period frequencies. Note a number of unfiltered long-period frequencies near -10,000 years, which may also correspond to non-linear forced terms with the planets. 4 2 0 2 4

Time (Myr) 

> 0.01
> 0.02
> 0.03
> 0.04
> 0.05
> 0.06
> Ecc

Asteroid (1175) Margo 

> No Short Period Filter
> W/ Short Period Filter
> Proper Ecc w/o Short Filter
> Proper Ecc w/ Short Filter

Figure 17. Two different filtered eccentricity time arrays for a forward integration of Asteroid (1175) Margo. Large amplitude terms that might be missed, especially short-period terms related to interactions with Jupiter, can produce small differences in the reported proper eccentricity. Here, filtering out a high-amplitude short-period term lowers the reported proper eccentricity by a value of 2.74 × 10 −3. With a reported uncertainty of 2.56 × 10 −6 by D. Nesvorný et al. (2024), not using the short-period filter would result in a large standardized residual of 966 in the reported proper eccentricity between SBDynT and the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) catalog. 

this offset in the reported semi-major axes is that the best-fit orbit used to initialize our simulation was more recently queried from JPL Horizons than the orbit used to compute the synthetic proper elements for AstDys catalog. This emphasizes how the current method of computing numerical uncertainties for synthetic proper elements is strongly impacted by the certainty of orbital determination. While a solar system small body may have an orbit in a very dynamically stable region of space, the numerical certainty of the best-fit orbit proper elements may outperform 42 0.000         

> 0.005
> 0.010
> 0.015
> 0.020
> 0.025
> Ecc
> Unfiltered Array
> Filtered Array
> 80 60 40 20 020 40 60 80
> 0.000
> 1.000
> 2.000
> 3.000
> 4.000
> Inc ( )
> Window Elements
> Proper Element

Time (Myr) 

TNO 45802 

Figure 18. Orbital evolution in e and I for TNO (45802) 2000 PV29. Filtering of Neptune’s g8 secular frequency and the transformation to the locally forced plane separates the proper e from the mean osculating e significantly. 10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8

Period (yrs)     

> 10 8
> 10 6
> 10 4
> 10 2
> 10 0
> 10 2
> 10 4
> Power

2000 PV29 Eccentricity Power Spectrum    

> SBDynT g
> AstDys g
> Neptune g8

Figure 19. The identified g frequencies for TNO (45802) 2000 PV29, with reference to the unfiltered eccentricity power spectrum. The proper g frequency reported by AstDys is much closer to Neptune’s g8 frequency than the g reported by SBDynT. This could be the result of differences in the integration sampling frequency, the integration length, or the method of dominant frequency identification between OrbFit and SBDynT. 0.090 

0.100 

0.110 

0.120 

0.130 

> Ecc

Unfiltered Array 

Filtered Array 

80 60 40 20 0 20 40 60 80 

1.000 

2.000 

3.000 

4.000 

5.000 

> Inc ( )

Window Elements 

Proper Element 

Time (Myr) 

# TNO 2023 FB55 

Figure 20. Orbital evolution in e and I for 2023 FB55. Long-period variation occurs in the both the proper inclination and eccentricity due to interactions with the g + s − g8 − s8 non-linear frequency. 43 10 5 10 6 10 7          

> Period (yrs)
> 10 1
> 10 1
> 10 3
> 10 5
> 10 7
> Power
> Eccentricity
> SBDynT g
> AstDys g
> Neptune g8
> 10 510 610 7
> Period (yrs)
> 10 1
> 10 1
> 10 3
> 10 5
> 10 7
> Inclination
> SBDynT s
> AstDys s
> Neptune s8

## 2023 FB55 Power Spectra                  

> Figure 21. Eccentricity and Inclination power spectra for TNO 2023 FB55. While very close, the gand sproper frequencies reported by SBDynT and AstDys are very slightly offset from each other. SBDynT reports g=−s≈0.406 "/yr, while AstDys reports (g≈0.389 , s ≈ − 0.391) "/yr. This approximates to a 1 and 2 bin difference at the resolution of the default SBDynT run.

the orbital certainty. While asteroid orbits can often be more accurately constrained, this is especially true for TNOs, with orbital periods on the scale of hundreds of years, which require multi-year or even multi-decade long observational arcs to tightly constrain orbital uncertainties. In fact, querying the covariance matrix for the 2124 objects within the AstDys TNO catalog, we find that only 211 objects have reported orbital uncertainties for a, e, and I that are all lower than the reported proper element uncertainties by AstDys. This trend remains true for the full TNO catalog of 5060 objects, with still only 222 objects having reported orbital uncertainties all lower than the reported proper elements uncertainties by SBDynT. In addition, we find that the reason why the proper element uncertainties exceed the orbital uncertainties in each case is because these objects all have chaotic orbits; as such, the proper element uncertainties are inflated by the scattering orbital evolution of these objects. This highlights the importance of recomputing proper elements for objects as orbits are more precisely measured, as well as jointly considering the orbital covariance along with the proper element uncertainty when studying an object’s dynamical history. The mapping from orbital to proper elements may be smooth enough in some regions of phase space to allow for updates in proper elements without new calculations. In any case, we report TNO residuals that, on average, filter out the influence of the giant planets more severely than AstDys, leading to proper elements that have been more strongly filtered and thereby lowered. This effect is noticeably and primarily systematic, meaning it is consistent across an entire population of dynamically-like objects. For the purpose of dynamical clustering, then, we consider such a disagreement to be a small issue, as the systematic offset should apply to all objects in a family group, which would cause them to still be clustered together. We do mention it, however, as an effect to consider in future studies. C.5. Standardized Residuals of the Catalogs 

To fully explore the differences between D. Nesvorný et al. (2024), the Asteroids Family Portal (B. Novaković et al. 2022), and SBDynT, we examine the catalog residuals across different regions of the main asteroid belt. Figures 22 and 23 show the proper orbital elements of the overlapping set of asteroids color coded by the raw residuals between the catalogs (Figure 22) and the standardized residuals between the catalogs (the residuals in units of the standard deviation for each individual comparison; Figure 23). We draw attention to several interesting regions of systematic residuals between the catalogs. First, we point out the larger residuals between the catalogs seen in both the e and I residuals in Figure 22 at low inclinations, high eccentricities, from 2.10 < a < 2.25 AU. This corresponds to the flaring region seen in Figure 5 where many proper elements have large uncertainties due to instability in the orbits of asteroids in these regions. This same region is actually present in Figure 3 of (D. Nesvorný et al. 2024), which displays the regions of high uncertainty for the (D. 44 Nesvorný et al. 2024) catalog, and represents the impact]of the 2g − 2g6 + s − s6 non-linear secular resonance, which contributes to the residuals at this location. We note that looking at the standardized residuals for the same region in Figure 23 comparing SBDynT and the Asteroid Families Portal that the standardized residuals for this region are actually quite well constrained, indicating that this resonance was handled similarly between OrbFit and SBDynT. We also note in Figure 23 that there is a reasonably close agreement between the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) catalog and SBDynT results among the general asteroid belt population. Generally, the SBDynT and D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) results seem to agree quite well, barring regions strongly affected by non-linear dynamics, such as the g + g5 − 2g6

resonance, which is somewhat visible in the SBDynT - Nesvorny standardized residuals; however, large systematic offsets between the catalogs of the typical asteroids are generally not seen. The same cannot be said in comparing both catalogs to the Asteroid Families Portal elements, however. This is particularly clear in Figure 23, comparing both the e and I standardized residuals in the middle and bottom panels. In the I standardized residuals, there is a clear delineation from 2.5-3.25 AU where the standardized residuals exceed a standard unit for the entire upper-right region. We find that SBDynT and D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) systematically report higher proper inclinations than OrbFit does for this population of asteroids (see Figure 5). The complex secular resonance structures in this region could contribute to these differences. Part of this divergent region seems to fall along the edge of the 2g6 − g5 secular resonance. This frequency is accounted for in SBDynT’s filtering method and is not known to be accounted for in the D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) filtering. In addition, the z2, z3, g5 + s6, and g6 + s6

frequencies also all fall into this region, which are again all handled by SBDynT’s filtering method. It could be that the filtering of these frequencies is more severe in the OrbFit code, or that these frequencies regularly lie close to the dominant frequency, in which case they are left untouched. A similar, but much less prominent, feature is seen in the e standardized residuals for the Asteroid Family Portal from 3.0-3.25 AU, where the upper right population of asteroids differ in their reported eccentricity; this feature is not present in the residuals comparing the SBDynT and D. Nesvorný et al. (2024) catalogs. It seems like that these two features could be related, as at high inclination, there begins to be some coupling between the eccentricity and inclination evolution. Despite this, the weighted RMS offsets between the catalogs remain quite good, though this systematic offset in the computed proper inclination between the Asteroid Families Portal and the other catalogs is surprising, because each study filters according to the same general theory. In addition, while the overall approaches to frequency filtering by each catalog may be somewhat different, they each have a mathematically similar basis rooted in Fourier theory. Lastly, we note the region near the 1:2 mean motion resonance with Jupiter, where higher residuals are visible in each comparison plot. In particular, we see that the more-stable low-e orbits in this region actually display the highest standardized residuals, which may appear counter-intuitive. This effect is discussed in Section C.3, and is related to the filtering of the short-period frequency terms caused by the orbital proximity to Jupiter’s 1:2 mean motion resonance. We mention this as a reminder that near resonances, there could still exist many systematic errors that exceed the numerical uncertainties, which should be taken into account when performing family finding. Similar plots can be made comparing the TNO AstDys catalog to the SBDynT catalog, as shown in Figure-24, with an additional plot demonstrating the residuals if they are standardized according to the orbital uncertainty for the individual objects, as reported by JPL Horizon JPL (2024), rather than the numerical uncertainty reported by AstDys. There initially seems to be poorer agreement between the TNO catalogs, especially in the case of the eccentricities. However, we note that the disagreement among the Cold Classical TNO’s in both inclination and eccentricity is generally within the amplitude of long-period variation for secularly resonant objects. In addition, the residuals for the Cold Classical TNO’s are well within the orbital uncertainties, which are subject to change whenever new observations are made for these objects. Since we may not have used the same orbital solutions as AstDys, small changes in initial conditions (relative to the orbital uncertainties) could lead to significant differences (relative to the proper element uncertainties taken from long-term windows in numerical integrations). Thus we find that the TNO catalogs still agree generally well, but care should be taken to consider both updates to the best-fit orbital certainties and the impact of long-period variation from secular effects, which can cause small changes to the reported proper elements, and which may be large relative to the numerical uncertainties. 45 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75 

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

0

5

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

> Proper Inclination (  )

Inclination Residuals 

1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75 

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

0.0 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

> Proper Eccentricity

Eccentricity Residuals 

10 5

10 4

10 3

10 2

> Inc(  )

10 5

10 4

10 3

10 2

> Ecc

SBDynT - Nesvorny 2024 Residuals 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75 

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

0

5

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

> Proper Inclination (  )

Inclination Residuals 

1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75 

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

0.00 

0.05 

0.10 

0.15 

0.20 

0.25 

0.30 

0.35 

0.40 

> Proper Eccentricity

Eccentricity Residuals 

10 5

10 4

10 3

10 2

> Inc(  )

10 5

10 4

10 3

10 2

> Ecc

SBDynT - AF-Portal Residuals 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75 

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

0

5

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

> Proper Inclination (  )

Inclination Residuals 

1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75 

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

0.0 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

> Proper Eccentricity

Eccentricity Residuals 

10 5

10 4

10 3

10 2

> Inc(  )

10 5

10 4

10 3

10 2

> Ecc

AF-Portal - Nesvorny 2024 Residuals 

Figure 22. Residuals comparing the differences in proper e and I between the 3 catalogs. 46 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75 

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> Proper Inclination (  )

Inclination Residuals         

> 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> Proper Eccentricity

Eccentricity Residuals   

> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> - Units
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> - Units

SBDynT - Nesvorny 2024 Standardized Residuals 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75 

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> Proper Inclination (  )

Inclination Residuals         

> 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> 0.35
> 0.40
> Proper Eccentricity

Eccentricity Residuals   

> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> - Units
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> - Units

SBDynT - AF-Portal Standardized Residuals 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75 

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> Proper Inclination (  )

Inclination Residuals         

> 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> Proper Eccentricity

Eccentricity Residuals   

> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> - Units
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> - Units

AF-Portal - Nesvorny 2024 Standardized Residuals 

Figure 23. Standardized Residuals comparing the differences in proper e and I between the 3 catalogs. Colors are limited to show between 0.1 - 10 standard deviations. Several interesting comparisons can be made between each of these figures, as discussed in this appendix. 47 40 42 44 46 48 50 

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> Proper Inclination (  )

Inclination Residuals      

> 40 42 44 46 48 50

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> Proper Eccentricity

Eccentricity Residuals         

> 10 5
> 10 4
> 10 3
> 10 2
> Inc ( )
> 10 5
> 10 4
> 10 3
> 10 2
> Ecc

SBDynT - AstDys TNO Residuals 40 42 44 46 48 50 

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> Proper Inclination (  )

Inclination Residuals      

> 40 42 44 46 48 50

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> Proper Eccentricity

Eccentricity Residuals   

> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> - units
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> - units

SBDynT - AstDys TNO Standardized Residuals 40 42 44 46 48 50 

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> Proper Inclination (  )

Inclination Residuals      

> 40 42 44 46 48 50

Proper Semi-major axis (AU) 

> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> Proper Eccentricity

Eccentricity Residuals   

> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> - units
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> - units

SBDynT - AstDys TNO Orbit Standardized Residuals 

Figure 24. Residuals, Standardized Residuals computed from the AstDys uncertainties, and Standardized Residuals computed from the best-fit orbit uncertainties comparing the differences in proper e and I between the AstDys and SBDynT TNO catalogs. Colors are limited to show between 0.1 - 10 standard deviations. Note that the larger orbital uncertainties produce much smaller residuals, indicating that improvements to the best-fit orbits for the TNOs will almost always shift the proper elements significantly to the reported proper element uncertainties.